---
layout: post
section-type: post
comments: true
title: "Ethnic Studies Now"
summary: ""
pid: rt4
permalink: /roundtable/ethnic-studies-now/
authors:
  - name: Frances Negrón-Muntaner
    img: frances-negron.jpg
    bio: "Frances Negrón-Muntaner is an award-winning filmmaker, writer, and scholar. She is Professor of English and Comparative Literature at Columbia University. Her work focuses on 19th- and 20th-century Caribbean and U.S Latino literatures and cultures; media and popular culture studies; ethnicity and race. Her recent work includes the edited volume <em>Sovereign Acts: Contesting Colonialism Across Indigenous Nations and Latinx America</em> (Arizona 2017), the documentary <em>Life Outside</em> (2016), and the <a href='https://www.valorycambio.org/' targer='_blank'>Valor y Cambio</a> (2019) art, digital storytelling and just-economy installation, currently on tour."
  - name: Roopika Risam
    img: roopika-risam.jpg
    bio: "Roopika Risam is an Associate Professor of Secondary and Higher Education and English at Salem State University. Her research interests lie at the intersections of postcolonial and African diaspora studies, humanities knowledge infrastructures, and digital humanities. She is the author of <em>New Digital Worlds: Postcolonial Digital Humanities in Theory, Praxis, and Pedagogy</em> (Northwestern UP, 2018). Risam is currently working on a book for Johns Hopkins UP recovering the unacknowledged contributions of ethnic studies scholars to the emergence of public humanities."
---

In this strong exchange, <a href="https://english.columbia.edu/people/profile/396" target='_blank'>Frances Negrón-Muntaner</a> and <a href="http://www.roopikarisam.com/" target='_blank'>Roopika Risam</a> discuss why Ethnic Studies now. Negrón-Muntaner discusses how universities approach Ethnic Studies as a threat precisely because Ethnic Studies seeks to overturn the status quo as an "insurrection" from within and without. Roopika Risam continues in the same vein by outlining the imbrication of the university and racial capitalism and declaring the university as we know it "indefensible."

---

<br>

### Frances Negrón-Muntaner | Begins:

For some, ethnic studies is an academic discipline; for others, an
interdisciplinary field. To me it is neither.

After nearly six decades of non, partial, and peripheral
institutionalization, ethnic studies simultaneously constitutes a series
of intellectual fields, methods of inquiry, theoretical praxes, and
political projects with a range of goals. Among these: to affirm the
knowledge produced by racialized people in the United States and
globally; to upend colonial (including white supremacist)
epistemologies, institutions, and power structures; and to generate
decolonial narratives, subjectivities, and forms of organization.

Ethnic studies is also a place-making practice with the capacity to
design autonomous and "undisciplined" sites of knowledge production and
association. This power is often negatively recognized by the state and
academic institutions: Just the discursive "threat" to found ethnic
studies spaces may trigger formidable resistance. Unsurprisingly, the
desire for ethnic studies as well as a different university and society
frequently takes the shape of actions to occupy, unsettle, and
reconfigure physical and discursive institutional space.

Not all ethnic studies praxis, however, is equally complex or resonant.
This accounts for why some practitioners have incorporated the terms
"critical," "intersectional," or "decolonial" to describe and distance
their work from what can be termed "DEI" (diversity, equity, inclusion)
regimes and accommodationist politics. But when pushed to its
epistemological and political limits, ethnic studies---alongside, and in
relation, to other akin post-disciplinary praxes such as decolonial
theory, intersectional feminism, and queer of color critique---is
insurrectionary. By using the term "insurrectionary," I mean to
underscore that ethnic studies is not only a critique of Eurocentric or
white supremacist universities but also a transformational praxis that
includes the knowing subject, epistemological formations, and social
relations more generally.

While according to recent statistics the number of ethnic studies job
postings is currently on the upswing, both the perceived destructive and
constructive potential of ethnic studies accounts for its containment in
higher education. As evidenced by the two well-publicized denials of
tenure to Latinx studies faculty at Harvard and Yale that have
galvanized scholars, activists, and students over the last year, this
outcome is not due to a lack of information or failure to understand
ethnic studies as an epistemological and political project. Rather, it
comes from understanding it too well. University leadership know that,
at its most radical, ethnic studies practices aim to make the university
_incapable of reproducing itself as it is_. That is, ethnic studies
seeks to bring forth a shift in not only who teaches but how, what, and
why. It also enacts other forms of belonging and enjoyment, and a
refusal to be neatly "arranged" according to the needs of capital and
governing elites within and beyond the university.

Accordingly, institutions attempt to restrain ethnic studies through
formal and informal mechanisms, including the denial of tenure,
budgetary restrictions, and the constant vetting of whether a faculty
member and their practice is a "good fit" or meets the standards of
"academic excellence." When institutions fail to grant tenure, it is
then not really a "failure," but the result of a modular but effective
apparatus built to limit, marginalize, and expel ethnic studies
faculty.

Of course, as with all power, institutions do not always say "no." For
various reasons, including as a strategy to demonstrate a university's
pluralist values and commitment to inclusivity, some ethnic studies
faculty, including radical scholars, may be incorporated and even
rewarded.  The irony is that one way to quell the insurrectionary
possibilities of ethnic studies would be to fully institutionalize it in
a contained fashion as a discipline of study just as sociology or
history. But that is unlikely to happen.

Whereas institutionalization is normalization and therefore subjection,
this approach would also mean making significant resources available to
people of color for actions conceptualized and led by them. This overtly
conflicts with the institutional logic of "opportunity hoarding," as
scholar Lázaro Lima has put it, or the allocation of most assets and
prospects to those who are perceived as the best positioned to uphold
the prevailing relations of power. Moreover, as ethnic studies' politics
seek systemic disruption beyond the national space, greater access to
resources may lead to not only more possibilities for "domestic"
minorities, territorial subjects, and racialized immigrants but also a
greater capacity to collaborate and connect with others at a global
scale. For the elite and their institutions, to provide resources to
ethnic studies is both a "waste" and a risk not worth taking.

At a time when the current order concentrates resources in increasingly
fewer hands and imperils all forms of life, ethnic studies is
insurrection. It is a refusal to be delimited or confined; a desire to
learn otherwise; and a daily praxis to live a non-extractive,
non-hierarchical, and free existence.

That's why we need it.

<br>

### Roopika Risam | Responds:

The university is indefensible.

The university in the U.S. emerged to educate a class of white men to
take up self-appointed positions as leaders of a new nation. Complicit
in nation-building, the university consolidated national identity and
citizenship as the inheritance of whiteness. The university is thus a
defender, a creator, and an arbiter of racial hierarchy.

The university cannot be separated from its relationship to settler
colonialism, racial capitalism, and enslavement---from its plantation
politics. The lands on which the university stands never belonged to the
white people who built academic buildings, dormitories, and athletic
fields upon them. They remain stolen lands, lands with which Indigenous
communities live and lands from which they have been removed and
estranged, alienated by the violence and broken promises at the heart of
the nation-building project of the U.S. The university built its
campuses on lands that were plantations, sites of racial terror and
violence. Stolen labor on stolen land generated capital for the
university, wealth produced through the oppression of Indigenous and
Black people, the essence of racial capitalism.

The university sustained racial capitalism in the U.S. and abroad.
Scholars like Craig Wilder, Leslie Harris, and Alfred Brophy have
unearthed these sordid histories of the university (<a href="https://www.bloomsbury.com/us/ebony-and-ivy-9781608193837/" target='_blank'>Wilder 2014</a> <a href="https://global.oup.com/academic/product/university-court-and-slave-9780199964239?cc=us&lang=en&" target='_blank'>; Brophy 2016</a> <a href="https://ugapress.org/book/9780820354439/slavery-and-the-university/" target='_blank'>; Harris et al, eds. 2019</a>). University coffers swelled with the spoils of colonialism and slavery. On Caribbean plantations, enslaved Black people produced capital that was funneled into university endowments. In the U.S., the university profited from what Saidiya Hartman calls the "fungibility" of enslaved Black
people (<a href="https://global.oup.com/academic/product/scenes-of-subjection-9780195089844?cc=us&lang=en&" target='_blank'>Hartman 1997, 21-26</a>), their exploited, uncompensated labor creating profit and
serving students, their bodies sold as commodities. All the while, white
scholars in the university produced knowledge to ossify the backbone of
white supremacy that undergirds the nation.

In this enterprise of knowledge production, born from a dark history,
ethnic studies provides a critical mediation: the interventions of
ethnic studies are indispensable because the university is indefensible.

Ethnic studies, like African diaspora, Indigenous, Latinx, and Asian
American scholars ourselves, occupies a tenuous position within the
university. Vital, necessary, and critical for racial equity and justice
in curriculum, faculty composition, and student services, ethnic studies
becomes institutionalized for managerial directives for "diversity" as
it simultaneously threatens to transform the entire operation of the
university, as it decenters whiteness. In her piece for this roundtable,
Frances Negrón-Muntaner writes with clarity on this issue, of the
"insurrectionary" nature of ethnic studies and its promise to
destabilize ways of knowing and social relations.

Insurrectionary ethnic studies is matched by the resistance of African
diaspora, Indigenous, Latinx, and Asian American scholars who undertake
such work in the university. I term this "academic insurgency," a mode
of scholarly practice that emphasizes interdisciplinary scholarship,
experiments with genres of composition and modes of communication,
engagement with multiple audiences both inside and outside of the
university, and continuous negotiation of the relationship between
theoretical knowledge and its practical effects on communities that have
been systematically minoritized---all in the fight for equity and
justice <a href="https://www.publicbooks.org/academic-generosity-academic-insurgency/" target='_blank'>for communities of color</a>. These are the survival tactics
forged in the fire of ethnic studies, the practices of everyday living
deployed by scholars of color simply to exist within the university.

Ethnic studies, like the insurgents of the academy, has always embodied
the maroon traditions of what Fred Moten and Stephano Harney call "the
undercommons of the university." (<a href="http://www.minorcompositions.info/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/undercommons-web.pdf" target='_blank'><em>Undercommons</em></a> 2013) They propose, "In the face of these
conditions one can only sneak into the university and steal what one
can. To abuse its hospitality, to spite its mission, to join its refugee
colony, its gypsy encampment, to be in but not of." (26) Ethnic
studies and scholars of color alike occupy this bifurcated position---one foot in, one foot out---navigating between complicity in the
excesses and exclusions of the university and using entree into that
space of privilege to build better worlds. We recognize the power of
access to a space where we can create knowledges not _on_ but _with_ our
communities, a rejoinder to the knowledge produced _about_ us. Small
acts of revolution, indeed, but so threatening to the university that
has stolen so much from us.

In the litany of theft that characterizes our relationship to the
university---theft of land, theft of labor, theft of our narratives,
epistemologies, and ontologies---these tactics are being co-opted by
white scholars concerned, of all things, about the continued existence
of the university. They advocate for these strategies---Work with
communities! Create open access to knowledge! Innovate in method, genre,
and publication!---as if these are new, as if they invented them---all to save the university as they know it.

But that's not the university we know.

When they deploy these strategies, they become the radicals poised to
save the university. When we deploy these tactics, which are
foundational to ethnic studies, we sow the seeds of our own destruction
in the university, becoming easy targets for denial of tenure,
promotion, hiring. We speak in languages and discursive modes that are
confounding to white scholars. We compose in genres they can't
understand. We publish in venues that are not theirs. We value the
expertise of individuals and communities they do not see as "academic."
We work double, triple, to meet their standards on their terms while
still meeting our own---all to survive in the universities that were
never built for us but that we transform by our presence.

Dr. Lorgia García-Peña's story, therefore, is the story of all of us who
work in ethnic studies, the story of all scholars of color in the
academy. Hers is the story of each of us who have been asked by our
evaluators, "Is that really \[insert discipline here\]?" Who have been
told by our departments, "You should be grateful we have two African
American literature classes, not just one." Who have been asked by our
colleagues, "Where are you from? No, where are you really from?" Who
have received student evaluations disputing our command of the English
language, even when we're fluent English speakers. Who have had our
right to be in our workplaces and classrooms questioned, not only by our
peers and students but by campus police. It's a story not just of the
Ivies but of the deep roots of white supremacy unfurled across
institutions of higher education throughout the U.S. and in their global
influences abroad. That's the university we know.

But we should be sowing the seeds of destruction of the university as we
know it.

Ethnic studies, in the insurrectionary mode that Negrón-Muntaner
articulates, needs to survive precisely because these are the
experiences of scholars of color within the academy. It needs to remain
in the "one foot in, one foot out" of the undercommons to resist
domestication into the academy's pallid discourses of "diversity" and
"decolonization," where the presence of scholars of color is tolerated
for the optics but not intended to incur transformation of the
university itself. The ultimate goal of this work is that it should not
need to exist. But it does. We're a long way from when reparations will
be made, when land will be repatriated, when curriculum will be
redesigned, when the university will atone for its sins. We're a long
way from when we burn it all down and build back up a transformed
university with equity and justice, not racial capitalism, at its
center.

Until then, the university remains indefensible, while ethnic studies
remains vital.
