---
layout: post
section-type: post
comments: true
title: "In Praise of the Lorgian Margin"
summary: ""
pid: rt5
permalink: /roundtable/lorgian-margin/
authors:
  - name: Urayoán Noel
    img: urayoan-noel.jpg
    bio: "Urayoán Noel is Associate Professor of English and Spanish and Portuguese at New York University. He is the author of <em>In Visible Movement: Nuyorican Poetry from the Sixties to Slam</em> (Iowa, 2014), winner the LASA Latina/o Studies Book Award, and several books of poetry. He is also a translator, performer, and media artist."
  - name: Rachel Afi Quinn
    img: rachel-quinn.jpg
    bio: "Rachel Afi Quinn is Assistant Professor of Comparative Cultural Studies and Women’s, Gender, and Sexuality Studies at the University of Houston. Her transnational feminist cultural studies scholarship focuses on mixed race, gender and sexuality in the African Diaspora. Her first book project, <em>Dominicana-Dominicana</em>, is an interdisciplinary cultural studies text that explores race, gender and sexuality through the cultural productions of Dominican women in Santo Domingo."
---

In this exchange Urayoán Noel and Rachel Afi Quinn examine the innovative methods of Lorgia García Peña’s <em>The Borders of Dominicanidad</em>. Urayoán Noel highlights the methodology of entering the margins of U.S. and Dominican national archives, which he calls the “Lorgian Margin,” and Rachel Afi Quinn highlights the self-reflexivity of this methodology, pointing to the ways that Lorgia García Peña’s own voice and embodied experience come under self-scrutiny in the text. 

---

<br>

### Urayoán Noel | Begins:

Lorgia García Peña\'s *The Borders of Dominicanidad* (2016) dares us to
engage with the \"unread margins\" (2) of US and Dominican national
archives, in solidarity with \"poor, black, marginal subjects who have
been historically oppressed and exiled from the nation-state\" (19). And
yet, García Peña\'s book goes beyond the politics of representation and
inclusion, embracing instead a poetics *and* politics of
\"contra*diction*\" (italics in the original). While *The Borders of
Dominicanidad* centers marginal bodies, its method involves urging us to
linger at the margins, where \"official stories of exclusion\" are
\"always contested, negotiated, and even redefined through
contra*dictions*\" (3). Such a poetics and politics leads us far beyond
the national archive and even beyond the black counter-archive (as in
Schomburg\'s \"dust of digging\") and into the palimpsestic dictions of
a translocal and borderlands lowercase dominicanidad, against an
uppercase Dominicanidad aligned with \"hegemonic and official
institutions of state control\" (\"Note on Terminology\").

Mobilizing these marginal contra*dictions* requires reading against the
archival grain: for instance, by brilliantly analyzing a short story by
\"official\" Dominican writer and politician Juan Bosch as part of \"a
conversation among Haitian, Dominican, and US American texts to analyze
the rhetorical significance of the \[Massacre of 1937\] in shaping
racial ideologies during the second half of the twentieth century\"
(17). It also involves recovering the repertoire of the (black, exiled)
body as a site of knowledge production and critique, as in the
theorization of the \"Nié\" (\"taint\") in performance artist Josefina
Báez\'s radically experimental text <em><a href="https://www.amazon.com/gp/aw/d/1882161114/ref=dbs_a_w_dp_1882161114" target="_blank">Levente no. Yolayorkdominicanyork</a>.</em>
(2011) as an embodied borderlands: a \"transhistorical location where
the stories of exclusion can be recovered and preserved\" (4).
Understanding Báez\'s imbricated textuality as \"a diction that embodies
and projects the very liminal experiences of the black Dominican and
Dominicanyork subject the nation seeks to contain\" (4), García Peña
strategically and subtly theorizes with, from, and through Báez, a key
figure in Dominican American literature and performance whose fiercely
sui generis and challenging work remains critically underappreciated.

The fact that García Peña can toggle effortlessly and authoritatively
between Bosch and Báez, between a Danticat novel and a Rita Indiana
music video, between the nationalist writer Manuel Rueda and the *isla
abierta* (open island) sensibility of the artist and performer David
"Karmadavis" Pérez, and so on, is in itself a challenge to a series of
disciplinary and disciplining turf logics: U.S.-centered Latinx studies
versus Latin American studies; ethnic studies critique versus American
studies historicism; the materiality of blackness versus the coalitional
politics of latinidad; the repeating island versus the lettered city;
nineteenth-century archival histories versus speculative futures; the
literary canon versus expressive cultures., etc. How many scholars could
rigorously and imaginatively inhabit such a range of contradictory
discourses? Ultimately, then, *The Borders of Dominicanidad* models the
very \"rayano consciousness\" it finds in a range of literary and
cultural texts, in the spirit of \"transnational, transtemporal
interchange\" that \"produces new ways to theorize Latino/a studies,
inciting fruitful dialogues that can help us rethink how power and
politics interact with the production of symbolic and geographic borders
that shape our understanding of race, nation, and culture\" (18). Thus,
although it is groundbreaking and revelatory purely as \"a study of the
palimpsestic coexistence of colonial impositions that are projected on
the racialized subjects living on the island or the United States\"
(10-11), *The Borders of Dominicanidad* matters just as much for its
palimpsestic border method, which leaves traces of the nation visible
only to magnify the margin. In mapping how \"black Dominican migrants
are exiles at home and abroad\" (2), García Peña challenges the
geographies and temporalities not just of institutional Dominicanidad
and Latinidad, but of keywords such as \"border\" and \"diaspora\" as
they structure Latinx studies and cultural studies more generally.

In a sense, then, the most relevant comparison here is not to
foundational transnational Dominicanists such as Silvio Torres-Saillant
but to Gloria Anzaldúa: both García Peña and Anzaldúa aim for an
autological poetics/politics that embodies what it theorizes, that
embraces the contradictory knowledges of the body, and that reclaims the
philosophical and poetic potential of metaphor (from Nié to rayano):
never pat, always generative. Given that the book\'s introduction is
framed as a response to a highly inappropriate professor ("Ah,
*dominicana*! I love your country!"\....), *The Borders of Dominicanidad*
also functions as an extended \"autohistoria-teoría,\" Anzaldúa\'s term
for a personal history that theorizes at the personal and social level.
The fact that this *autohistoria-teoría* tells a story of personal and
social struggle in an academic space shaped by the violence of \"the
professor\'s diction\" (1) underscores the crucial stakes of García
Peña\'s project of \"contra*diction*,\" and it takes on utterly
vertiginous dimensions in the context of her tenure denial. When
confronted with the violence of their own diction, the institution
doubles down and the guard must crack down. But, fortunately for us, the
margins keep multiplying, as part of the ongoing \"project of recovering
and historicizing knowledge interruptions\" (1). Amid \"abysmal
inequalities\" (3), we nonetheless magnify our shared stories, even from
our lone, quotidian particularity (to paraphrase Báez\'s *Levente*).

If we follow Derrida, Whitehead\'s notion of philosophy as footnotes to
Plato gives way to a philosophy in, of, and for the margins. Similarly,
if we follow García Peña and take seriously the bodies that are
footnotes to the nation and its histories, we end up not with a
rehabilitated national narrative of tidy liberal inclusion, but with an
un-easy yet necessary awareness of our own location in contested space.
This is the space I call the Lorgian margin. You can keep the nation and
its diminishing marginal returns (marginalia de la nación y su alias).

I\'m down with LGP! Gracias, Lorgia García Peña, for the
contra*dictions*.

<br>

### Rachel Afi Quinn | Responds:

Lorgia García Peña's interdisciplinary first book *The Borders of
Dominicanidad* (2016) offers a transhistorical cultural studies approach
to Dominican identity, providing us with essential language through
which to comprehend the complexities of Dominicanidad---formed on the
island and in the diaspora. Just as she immediately acknowledges that
"The intellectual legacy of Juan Bosch served as a bridge between the
often slippery here and there my book connects" (xi), I want to
acknowledge that García Peña's theoretical contributions in *Borders of
Dominicanidad* do essential bridge-building in the field of Dominican
studies, informing the direction the field is headed. Through a critical
intervention into how we imagine Dominican national identity and its
relationship to blackness, García Peña names for us the ways that
"silences and repetitions operate in the erasure of racialized Dominican
subjects from the nation and its archive" (1). In a text that is rich
with gems of critical analysis, she brings essential voices---including
her own---from the margin to the center. And, by exposing us <a href="https://doi.org/10.1215/9780822373667-001" target="_blank">from page
one</a> to the ways in which her own body as a Dominican woman serves as a site onto which a
colonial narrative is projected, she sets us on edge in order to make
clear the different stakes for brown and black bodies wanting to produce
knowledge within the academy.

In response to Urayoán Noel, I want to reflect on the experience of
being in constant exile because of race and nation, something that
García Peña's work names, at a site at which "poetics *and* politics"
emerge. What does this mean for so many of us who hold the border
within? The idea of a "Lorgian margin" ought to articulate what is at
stake in knowledge production by women of color who find themselves
required to theorize "from the flesh" (5).

As García Peña writes, "El Nié signifies not the border space that the
subject inhabits---Anzaldúa's the barbwire---but rather the body that
carries the violent borders that deter them from entering the nation,
from access to full citizenship and from public, cultural, historical
and political representation" (4). And throughout this text she
necessarily theorizes her own embodied experience as a Dominican woman,
as she navigates the nuances and contradictions of Dominican identity
across numerous intersecting and competing narratives. As an "embodiment
of past through present knowledge," El Nié does the work of bridging the
diaspora and state-produced borders through the body, while the
Dominican body itself reveals "national exclusion (borders) across
history and generations" (5). Nevertheless, because "skepticism
surrounds intellectual projects that are not solely evidence based,"
García Peña demands of us a new form of reading in order to locate "a
more complete version of 'the truth'" (5).

I value García Peña's astute practice of "autohistoria-teoría" in part
because she names for readers the ways that her own subjectivity might
just as readily produce the limitations of her analysis of race. For
example, she offers self-interrogation as a primary method for a
cultural studies analysis of Rita Indiana Hernández's mulata Madonna in
the music video "<a href="https://www.google.com/search?q=da+p+a+lo+do" target="_blank">Da pa lo do</a>"
(2011). García Peña writes:

> Though I am a light-skinned Dominican like Hernández, my encounter
> with US racism, particularly outside the urban area in which I grew
> up, led me to identify as black. Still, I am aware---and often
> reminded---of the fact that in the Dominican Republic, my light
> complexion and my acquired middle class make me a racially privileged
> Dominican. My own racial contra*dictions*, combined with my engagement
> in the US race/ethnicity struggles, provoked a discursive dead end in
> my analysis (161).

Listening to her own visceral response to the image of Hernández allowed
García Peña "to confront my own contradictions, an exercise that brought
me closer to a new pedagogical and investigative approach: one in which
the specificity of the experience being examined superseded my own
ontological bias" (161). Hernández's cultural production, in which she
darkened her skin to perform the Madonna, but also to invoke the Vodou
lwa Ezili, could be read as a "counterhegemonic action in the context of
Dominican national ideology and cultural dominance" (165). Ultimately,
this self-reflective process of reading and re-reading reveals how
García Peña has arrived at critical insights regarding the inconvenient
"truths" about the ways that Dominicans' complex experiences of
blackness in the U.S and on the island become marginalized.

The "Lorgian margin," which Noel proposes would leave us with an
"un-easy yet necessary awareness of our own location in contested
space," also suggests sitting with the contra*diction* of being both
within and outside of privilege with an understanding of how both are
central to one's world view even if they contradict one another. By
devising the concept of contra*diction* (with her own emphasis on
"diction" as language that produces subjectivity), García Peña has been
able to demonstrate the ways that "narratives produce nations through
the violence, exclusion, and the continuous control of racialized
bodies" (13). She has engaged transnational feminist scholars of color
such as M. Jacqui Alexander and Chandra Talpade Mohanty in naming
institutional efforts to marginalize the embodied knowledge that we
produce, that which inherently provides us powerful insights about the
workings of racialized and gendered constructions of power. Meanwhile,
her own experiences of marginalization in the academy, violences of
erasure, <a href="https://www.thecrimson.com/article/2019/11/4/fas-no-malicious-intent/" target="_blank">policing</a>,
<a href="https://www.nbcboston.com/news/local/hateful-racist-note-harvard-faculty-member-probe-launched/115378/" target="_blank">hate</a>,
and dismissal, remind us that power works in precisely these ways,
particularly through tactics of exclusion. Nevertheless, it is within
the academy that García Peña has been able to shape the field of
Dominican studies, holding each of us in this field to a higher standard
in our work, of both intellectual rigor and generosity. This is her
practice, and it becomes evident in how readily we seek to publicly
engage with her intellectual contributions.

Thankfully, García Peña's work pushes back against colonial power
structures with great clarity of vision, questioning who produces
knowledge, from where, and for whom. Thankfully she has produced work
that questions the official narrative and examines "how 'truths'
contribute to the violence, silencing and erasure of racialized people
and their truths" (13). Is there any other way to respond to ongoing
acts of violence? One of the contradictions we are left to wrestle with
is the attempt to marginalize the intellectual contributions of García
Peña whose work so many of us rely on as bridge.



