---
layout: post
section-type: post
comments: true
title: "A Black Radical Tradition Without Borders"
summary: "In this epistolary exchange, Robin D. G. Kelley (UCLA) and Laurent Dubois (Duke U.) respond to a set of guiding questions about the importance of thinking, theorizing, and historicizing race and racial blackness globally, internationally, and transnationally."
pid: rt3
permalink: /roundtable/black-radical-tradition/
authors:
  - name: Robin Kelley
    img: robin-kelley.jpg
    bio: "Robin Kelley is Distinguished Professor and Gary B. Nash Endowed Chair in U.S. History at UCLA. His work explores the history of social movements and culture in the U.S., the African Diaspora, and Africa. His most recent books include <em>Thelonious Monk: The Life and Times of an American Original</em> (Free Press, 2009) and <em>frica Speaks, America Answers!: Modern Jazz in Revolutionary Times</em> (Harvard UP, 2012)."
  - name: Laurent Dubois
    img: laurent-dubois.jpg
    bio: "Laurent Dubois is Professor of History and Romance Studies and Director of the Forum for Scholars & Publics at Duke University. He is a specialist on the history and culture of the Atlantic world, with a focus on the Caribbean and particularly Haiti. His most recent books include <em>Haiti: The Aftershocks of History</em> (Metropolitan Books, 2012), <em>The Banjo: America’s African Instrument</em> (Harvard UP, 2016), and <em>Freedom Roots: Histories from the Caribbean</em> (UNC Press, 2019), co-authored with Richard Turits."
---


Among other fields, <em>The Borders of Dominicanidad</em> resonates in rich ways with the interdisciplinary field of Black Studies, writ globally. In the powerful epistolary exchange below, Robin D. G. Kelley (UCLA) and Laurent Dubois (Duke University) respond to a set of guiding questions about the importance of thinking, theorizing, and historicizing race and racial blackness globally, internationally, and transnationally.

Dubois and Kelley address a global black radical tradition, its struggles, social movements, and revolutions, and the writers who have provided methodological frames for pursuing and writing about this black radical tradition from the perspectives of those imagining and struggling for a better world. They also delineate the role of formative teachers who use their positions in institutions of higher education to mentor additional generations of scholars, pushing them to continue writing in and from the global black radical tradition.

---

<br>

### Laurent Dubois | Begins:

Dear Robin,

I feel like it makes sense to start by recalling the formative place
you've had in my own thinking and work on the question we've been asked
to dialogue about. The two classes I took from you at the University of
Michigan in the early 1990s, which focused around African-American Urban
History, profoundly shaped my later work writing about the history of
revolution in the 18<sup>th</sup> century Caribbean. You guided me as I wrote my
first in depth history paper, which was a study of the 1968 uprising in
Washington, D.C., that was part of hundreds of such events that took
place in the wake of the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr. I used
oral histories at the Moorland-Spingarn Research Collection at Howard
University, gathered just after the events, along with other sources.

The question that preoccupied me was how to write a history of these
events from within, from the perspective of the actors who drove the
uprising itself. This was about finding a way through the labyrinth of
outside representations and interpretations of the event and towards a
different kind of story, one that tried to get at the crossroads of past
and future at work at the moment, the way in which the uprising was
about a response to events but also an attempt to map out a different
kind of vision for the future.

Looking back, I now see that the questions you had raised through what
we read and our discussions, and those you asked about this paper,
ultimately became central to the way that I approached the parallel
problem of writing about enslaved insurrection and revolution in the
Caribbean. By then, you had left the University of Michigan, but the
lessons you taught—the way you tended to tilt and challenge received
stories, and received wisdom—was always an inspiration.

So my answer to the second part of this question is that in a way, in
my work, the challenge of writing about the moment of the late 1960s has
become intertwined with the challenge of writing about the late
eighteenth century. They are united by the demand, one you often issued
in your teaching, to remember that revolution is about possibility,
about mapping out a different kind of terrain through imagination and
action. And that the revolutionary struggles of the past have created
rich genealogies of thought, forms of challenge and perspective, that we
have to grapple with and root ourselves within.

And this works best when we think truly globally, across diasporic
spaces and experiences, always aware of the intricate differences while
retaining a sense that there is a field of inter-connection at work.
This is what the foundational work of Julius Scott in [*The Common
Wind*](https://www.versobooks.com/books/2851-the-common-wind) allowed us
to see about the eighteenth century Greater Caribbean. He traced out a
world of motion, of border-crossing (primarily in the form of
water-crossing), largely using the archives of those who sought to stop
and repress this motion to trace out its contours.

There are parallels to this in the way Lorgia García Peña's work
allows us to see a range of figures who challenged the imperial and
national projects aimed at constraining and circumscribing forms of
Caribbean being. Her historicizing of race seems to me particularly
important as a model within the North American academy because of the
way it makes clear the imbrication of colonial and imperial racial
formations and practices with the deadly phantasms of authoritarian
nationalisms in the Caribbean region.

I look forward to hearing your responses to these initial
reflections!

<br>

### Robin D. G. Kelley | Responds:

Wow! I appreciate your kind and generous memories of my classes during
those exciting days in Ann Arbor. I remember it differently; sitting
back and being in awe of your prodigious work and startlingly brilliant
ideas.

Of course, your books have advanced your ideas in that class and more,
and your point in your response "that the revolutionary struggles of the
past have created rich genealogies of thought, forms of challenge and
perspective" reminds me why, every year, I assign your article, ["An
Enslaved Enlightenment: Rethinking the intellectual history of the
French Atlantic,"](https://scholars.duke.edu/display/pub690161) *Social
History* (2006), to both graduate and undergraduate students.

This is a great segue into the question before us. "Thinking, theorizing
and historicizing race and racial blackness" sits at the heart of what
we call "Black Studies." Which is to say, it has always been about Black
lives, the structures that produce premature death, the ideologies that
render us less than human, and the struggle to secure our future as a
people and for *humanity*, for all *life*, and for the planet. It
emerged as an intellectual and political project rooted in a Black
radical tradition without national boundaries and borders. As you know,
my main teacher was Cedric J. Robinson when I was a grad student at UCLA
in the 1980s, and he was up the road at UC Santa Barbara. Incidentally,
his first faculty job was at the University of Michigan---a place that
connects all of us, including Lorgia. In any case, he said, "Black
Studies is revolutionary in its political and historical origins and
intellectual impulses. To paraphrase C. L. R. James, who insisted that
Black Studies was the study of Western Civilization, Black Studies is a
critique of Western Civilization" ([Morse "Capitalism" 8](http://www.cwmorse.org/archives/perspectives.on.anarchist.theory.vol3.no1.spring99.pdf)). Of course, he meant it was both
*and more* with the hilariously brilliant caveat that "Western
Civilization is neither." So the "thinking, theorizing, historicizing
race" includes interrogating the production of difference and its
relation to power, exploitation, and the persistence of inequality; it
means examining how Blackness as a category imbricated by gender, class,
and sexuality came into being as a central feature of Western thought;
how colonialism and the enslavement of human beings from Africa served
as a fulcrum for the emergence of modernity, and in many respects
presented political and moral philosophy with its most fundamental
challenge; how people of African descent tried to remake and re-envision
the world through ideas, art, and social movements.  This is work you
and Lorgia and others have done so brilliantly, while acknowledging---as
Cedric always had---that the racial regimes upon which the so-called
West stands are dynamic yet unstable conceits and fabrications, fictions
that stand in for our actual selves but fictions with real material
consequences.

Ironically, I don't teach courses on race nor do I write about race
theoretically. Lorgia's *The Borders of Dominicanidad* is a brilliant
example of this kind of work. My teaching and writing focus on social
movements. Of course, the history of the black Left, mostly movements
connected to the Third (Communist) International, as well as radical
nationalist and anti-colonial movements, and the links between movements
across borders, has been formative. However, rather than rehash all of
that, I want to turn to the global/international movement that has been
*most* formative for me because it links our work with Lorgia's and with
my dear friend Julius Scott: the Haitian Revolution. I first read
James's [*The Black
Jacobins*](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/86417/the-black-jacobins-by-c-l-r-james/)
when I was 18, my first year in college at Cal State Long Beach. James,
Walter Rodney, and W. E. B. Du Bois were the holy trinity for me, but
nothing compared to James's treatment of the San Domingue
revolution. Just as Trotsky's three volume [*History of the Russian
Revolution*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1930/hrr/) served
as James's model for understanding Toussaint and mass rebellion, *The
Black Jacobins* became my model for understanding how revolutions happen
and their potential global ramifications.  Of course, your work on this
is magnificent. *The Borders of Dominicanidad* make the profound point
that "'Fear of Haiti'---the overwhelming concern that overtook slave
economies like the United States and Spain following the slave revolt
that began in 1791 and led to Haitian independence in 1804---is
foundational to the production of US notions of race and citizenship"
(7).  But I want to spend a moment on Julius Scott's *The Common
Wind*, which you rightfully cite for allowing us to see the Greater
Caribbean, for Scott's ability to unearth those silences in the archives
to find dynamic motion and revolutionary spirit that drove radical
"Republicanism" in the hemisphere. (His subjects are the original "Black
Republicans"!) These were the masterless people fighting for freedom---a
common wind---not bound by nation, condition of servitude, religion,
etc. You can see why the Haitian revolution was so dangerous and why it
stands back of U.S., imperial, and regional racial regimes from the
beginning of the 19<sup>th</sup> century until now.

Julius and I go way back; I credit him with being one of my most
influential teachers and I had the privilege of reading his dissertation
back in 1989---just three years after he completed it. I was struck by
his vivid portrait of the "masterless" people during the early years of
Caribbean settlement, that rebellious, unruly class of pirates and
buccaneers, maroons, and other fugitives---who refused to be tamed and
could only be subdued through force and control of a settler colonial
order. The theme of masterlessness as a social practice and vision of
horizontal power actually challenged---or at least potentially
challenged---the prevailing racial regimes. This made them dangerous,
but it also marginalized "masterlessness" in the face of theoretical
conceptions of race that treat anti-blackness as fixed and
totalizing. *The Common Wind* carries a radical anti-slavery,
antinomian, leveling vision of Republicanism---an emancipatory
vision. In other words, the masterless people, these traveling
insurgents, not only spread news and information; they spread
ideas---ideas about revolution. Scott makes the crucial contribution
that it was precisely the circulation of ideas and people across the
Western hemisphere and Caribbean basin, not just immiseration and
repression, that gave birth to significant political movements such as
an abolition Republicanism, Pan-Africanism, and new, often suppressed,
expressions of internationalism. In many ways, *The Common Wind* carried
a vision of the future world far more radical than anything being
pursued in France or Philadelphia. Your own *Avengers of the New World*
and *A Colony of Citizens* illuminate and brilliantly elaborate on how
the rebellions and the networks that carried these radical ideas were
the force behind a genuine revolution in the hemisphere, but were
ultimately defeated.

Again, all three of you---in your own way---demonstrate that there was
no discrete, bounded English Atlantic or Spanish Atlantic or Portuguese
Atlantic. These New and Old World Africans moved through all empires,
maroons coordinated insurrections across language, and that border
between Haiti, the Dominican Republic, and the U.S. connected rather
than divided peoples. This is not to say that that all empires are
undifferentiated, but rather Black people in motion and in struggle were
no respecters of nations.

<br>

### Laurent Dubois | Continues:

Dear Robin,

Wow back! This is really humbling and moving to read. It means so much
to have you speak to and engage my work like this, and that you see it
in this way as part of a broader effort to re-think the geography of
ideas and struggles in the diasporic context.

This all got me thinking about the fact that none of this work would be
possible without the environments that faculty and students create at
certain moments, in certain institutions. It was only because of the
intellectual space that you, Julius, and others among the faculty at
University of Michigan at that time, including Rebecca Scott and
Fernando Coronil, two other key mentors for me, created for those of us
just starting out that we were even able to imagine doing the kinds of
projects that we ultimately did. Your writing was an example of what
could be done, but what you did in the classroom was really create a
site of possibility from which to think openly about what we considered
important, compelling, and potentially impactful as work. Without that,
I can easily imagine that I would have run into a dead end in graduate
school, since I was proposing to work on something that at the time was
quite marginalized as a topic in History. We still have a long way to
go, of course, but it's striking how much the history, literature and
culture of the Caribbean are now at the center of so much scholarly
conversation in ways that was not true at all when I entered graduate
school and then proposed a dissertation on the history of Guadeloupe.
Thus the accumulation of efforts and steps and pushes that have taken
many shapes. A few years into my graduate school training, Michel Rolph
Trouillot visited campus and circulated a draft of one of the chapters
from [*Silencing the
Past*](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/246609/silencing-the-past-20th-anniversary-edition-by-michel-rolph-trouillot/),
the one on Sans Souci, and just reading that and hearing him talk about
it was deeply influential in me deciding to pursue the path that I
did.

Which is to say that presence and space within institutions matters so
much in so many ways, for that is how our perspectives and geographies
of knowledge actually shift. Lorgia recognizes this really powerfully in
[the opening to *The Borders of
Dominicanidad*](https://read.dukeupress.edu/books/book/17/chapter/96988/IntroductionDominicanidad-in-Contradiction),
with a story that is a counterpoint to what we have been describing
here, a moment of exclusion and othering that she experienced at the
University of Michigan a few years after the period we have been
discussing. It's a brilliant beginning for the work because it is such
disturbing example of the processes that she explores throughout the
following chapters, of the ways in which individuals get fixed into
certain categories, imprisoned in certain rubrics, with deep, violent
consequences for the constitution of our worlds. I know it resonates
with many readers in part because this kind of nefarious marking and
exclusion happens constantly, in so many ways and on so many levels. We
all see it in our different institutions. It takes different forms,
frequently combining the proud parochialism of Eurocentrism and
disciplinary bordering with racialized habits of mind, to produce the
effects we see all around us.

Through this beginning, and throughout the work, Lorgia analyzes the
ways in which the freedom of movement and self-constitution, the
creation of cultures and practices that join together multiple worlds,
all become seen as threats to white supremacist and imperial orders. And
it is prophetic, too, in a disturbing way about the larger story of
continued marginalization and denial that this very project is about
illuminating and contesting. This moment is very much about fighting for
the kinds of spaces that are essential, for the university as an
institution and therefore also for the broader social world, if there is
to be hope for a different kind of future.

Part of what is so powerful about her intervention in her first book,
and so important about all the contributions she will continue to make
in the next one, is that it represents a lucid and unflinching diagnosis
of the profound imbrications of all these different practices of
exclusion. The island of Ayiti, redubbed Hispaniola in the first of many
acts of erasure (though one later resisted through the restorative
naming of Haiti in 1804), has always been the pivot between the
constitution of white supremacy and the development of imperial projects
of enslavement. It really is where so much all began, and as many of the
great novelists of the island --- I'm thinking notably of Jean-Claude
Fignolé, but we could list so many others ---have , that long and deep
history of colonial violence continues to transect the present, to be
ever-present, spiraling. Lorgia's incredible [chapter on the 1937
massacre of Haitians, "Speaking in
Silences,"](https://read.dukeupress.edu/books/book/17/chapter/97051/Speaking-in-SilencesLiterary-Interruptions-and-the) notably
her readings of work by Edwidge Danticat, really strike a chord in this
regard, for they show how that period of violence is situated within
this larger nexus of histories of structures and categories. But the
book also does the vital work of memory, of reconstituting the worlds
that Trujillo sought to destroy, and more broadly of the work of
restitution of the stories of past and present day *rayanos*,
counterparts to the "masterless" that Julius Scott writes about in [*The
Common Wind*](https://www.versobooks.com/books/2851-the-common-wind).

There's obviously so much more we could discuss here, and I'm grateful
to the organizers of this project for having created a space for us to
re-connect and dialogue.
