---
layout: post
section-type: post
comments: true
title: "Traversing the Borders of Dominicanidad"
summary: "In this exchange, Jossianna Arroyo (U. of Texas, Austin), Sharina Maillo-Pozo (U. of Georgia), and Danny Méndez (Michigan State U.) delve into <em>The Borders of Dominicanidad</em>. Arroyo and Maillo-Pozo offer cogent analyses of the book’s wide-ranging contributions, and Méndez offers a moving response to their analyses that considers the book in relation to García Peña’s commitments."
pid: rt2
permalink: /roundtable/traversing-borders/
authors:
  - name: Jossianna Arroyo
    img: jossianna-arroyo.jpg
    bio: "Jossianna Arroyo is Professor of Latin American and Caribbean Literatures and Cultures in the Department of Spanish and Portuguese and the Warfield Center for African and African American Studies. Her research interests center on Latin American, Luso-Brazilian and Caribbean literatures and cultures. She is the author of <em>Travestismos culturales: Literatura y etnografia en Cuba y Brasil</em> (Pittsburgh UP 2003) and <em>Writing Secrecy in Caribbean Freemasonry</em> (Palgrave 2013)."
  - name: Sharina Maillo-Pozo
    img: sharina-maillo-pozo.jpg
    bio: "Sharina Maillo-Pozo is Assistant Professor of Spanish/Latinx Studies in the Department of Romance Languages at the University of Georgia. She specializes in Latinx and Caribbean literature and culture, with special attention to the cultural production of the Dominican Republic and its diaspora in the United States."
  - name: Danny Mendez
    img: danny-mendez.jpg
    bio: Danny Mendez is an Associate Professor of Spanish in the Department of Romance and Classical Studies and a Core-Faculty of the Program of Global Studies in Arts and Humanities (GSAH) at Michigan State University. His research focuses on contemporary narrative representations of Dominican migrations to the United States and Puerto Rico, analyzing the particular ways in which these narratives challenge conceptions of Latin American literature and Latino Studies."
---


In this exchange, <a href="https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/spanish/faculty/ja3344" target="_blank">Jossianna Arroyo</a> (University of Texas, Austin), <a href="https://www.rom.uga.edu/directory/people/sharina-maillo-pozo" target="_blank">Sharina Maillo-Pozo</a> (University of Georgia), and <a href="http://www.rcs.msu.edu/people/danny-mendez" target="_blank">Danny Méndez</a> (Michigan State University) delve into *The Borders of Dominicanidad*. Arroyo and Maillo-Pozo offer cogent analyses of the book’s wide-ranging contributions, and Méndez offers a moving response to their analyses that considers the book in relation to García Peña’s commitments.

---

<br>

### Jossianna Arroyo:

Lorgia García Peña's *The Borders of Dominicanidad: Race, Nation and the
Archives of Contradiction* (Duke UP, 2016) is a major tour the force in
Dominican, Caribbean, and African Diaspora Studies. *Borders of
Dominicanidad* has shifted the field of Dominican Studies as it has
problematized blackness by bringing forth the complex negotiations
within and outside national borders by elites, intellectuals, and
collectivities. The book has received several book awards, including the
Gloria Anzaldúa Award from the National Women's Association (2017) and
the Isis Duarte Award offered by the Latin American Studies Association
(2016). In this book García Peña looks at the "border" as an
epistemological, social, and performative space from where the
"contradictions" of blackness emerge in line with the influences of
imperial narratives. The book takes several historical episodes as a
point of departure to read them with literature and performative works
as examples to assess the "contradictions" of the archive and the making
of these archives in the Dominican Republic. Race, as well as blackness,
are at the center in what García Peña describes as "rayano" or border
consciousness that has shaped and continues shaping discourses of
humanity, subjectivity, and race in Haiti and the Dominican Republic.
Along with the "rayano" García Peña reads the "nié" (ni de aquí ni de
allá) as an epistemological standing for Dominicans who migrate and move
transnationally between the island and the United States. By looking at
the contradictions of the "Archive of Dominicanidad" García Peña reads
<a href="https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/246609/silencing-the-past-20th-anniversary-edition-by-michel-rolph-trouillot/" target="_blank">the silences of history</a> and the ways History, as well as histories in macro- and micro-levels, have shaped blackness in relation to *dominicanidad.*

The major contributions of *Borders of Dominicanidad* are threefold.
First, it is an original reading of multiple texts and archives; second,
and most importantly, it brings in Dominicans from the island and the
diaspora into discussions of Caribbean and Latina/o Studies; and third
it makes of the border a site of epistemological, philosophical and
social intervention. Race and particularly blackness are at the core of
these readings of the *border as a material* (socio-economic),
*epidermal* (skin) and *political* question/construction. While the book
departs from the unquestionable reality that Dominicans are black, it is
one of the first scholarly works that looks at Dominican history,
literature and performance in dialogue with U.S. histories/ imperial
formations as a key element for a transnational/hemispheric
understanding of the role of the U.S. in the process. García Peña, reads
the archive against the grain, to assess the way the \"dictions\"
perform active readings of social agency and are thereby duplicitous. In
other words, they explain how social actors change or go against the
"written" word, or how the written word or archival record contradicts
itself.

The book shifts these histories from the archive to the lives and
writings of Dominican migrants and Latina/o selves; but for my own
research and work in 19th and early 20th century Caribbean Studies, the
chapter on Oliverio Mateo and the Palma Sola movement stands out as one
of the most important contributions to the historiography of empire and
the U.S. occupation of Hispaniola. Thus, while the border as a political
question emerges as a line demarcated by imperial designs, the
*cofradías* at San Juan de la Maguana enacted forms of uprising and
socio-political unrest through the language of Afro-Dominican
religiosity, making Olivorio Mateo, the man saved or coming from the
storm, a human god. Therefore, from the voice and diction of Dominga
Alcántara, la reina de la cofradía, Afro-popular religiosity **marks a
point of diction and voices this unrest.** This chapter not only
connects these past incursions of the U.S. military invasion into
Mateo's followers (and his body) but looks at the creation of the "evil
zombie" narrative on both sides of the border. By analyzing Mateo\'s
body in photography (as a living body and as a corpse) García Peña
deconstructs the hegemonic readings of the military archive and rescues
the power of the religious leader. In addition, the construction of
Liboristas as Haitian "evildoers" by the U.S. marines idealized the
civility of the Dominican Republic, while Liborio is still present not
only in other moments of political unrest (1965), but in salves and
palos music, as well as daily ritual in the Dominican Republic.

As we see in contemporary films such as *Cocote* (2017), directed by
Nelson Carlo de los Santos Arias, these shifts have also been negotiated
against the influences of the Protestant church. As García Peña makes
clear at the end of the chapter, literature, particularly the work of
novelists such as Nelly Rosario and Junot Díaz as examples of "textos
montados (possessed texts)," are grasping the silences of history in
relation to U.S. occupation of the Dominican Republic and Haiti (84).
This chapter is also important for reading contemporary incursions into
the Dominican Republic and Haiti, after the earthquake of 2010, as it is
empire (military, economic, social) that is yet again demarcating the
current uprisings in Haiti.

<br>

### Sharina Maillo Pozo:

On December 9, 2016, I had the honor of presenting Lorgia García-Peña's
groundbreaking book, *The Borders of Dominicanidad. Race, Nation, and
Archives of Contradiction *at Word Up Community Bookshop in Washington
Heights, NYC.  Three years later, I find myself revisiting my remarks
and reflecting on the revolutionary contributions of *Borders of
Dominicanidad *to the field of Dominican studies. 

*Borders of Dominicanidad *challenges historical and fictional
foundational narratives that have delineated Dominican (trans)national
identity. This insightful and carefully researched book* *questions the
role of silences and repetitions in the structural foundation of what
García-Peña dubs as "the Archive of Dominicanidad"* *through a
groundbreaking analysis of five pivotal moments in the history of the
Dominican nation: the murders of *The Galindo Virgins* in 1822; the
criminalization of Afro-religious practices during the U.S. occupation
between 1916 and 1924 and the death of Afro-Dominican religious leader,
Papá Liborio; the massacre of more than 20,000 ethnic Haitians and
Afro-Dominicans on the Dominican-Haitian border in 1937; the 1965 US
military intervention and the massive emigration that succeeded it; and
the 2010 earthquake. By taking a revisionist and interdisciplinary
approach, García-Peña recovers archives that contradict, challenge,
negotiate, and redefine official narratives. In this sense, *Borders of
Dominicanidad *historicizes *dominicanidad* through counter-hegemonic
dictions that challenge the veracity and accuracy of official archives
by examining a wide array of unexplored historical documents, cultural
artifacts, and events.

In* Borders of Dominicanidad*,* *García-Peña
understands *dominicanidad* as a conflation of a geopolitical
triangulation (Haiti, The Dominican Republic, and the United States): "I
see dominicanidad as a category that emerges from the historical events
that placed the Dominican Republic in a geographic and symbolic border
between the United States and Haiti since its birth in 1844" (3). By
focusing on the role of U.S. imperialism in delineating racial borders
between Haiti, the Dominican Republic, and the United States, García
Peña recovers *dominicanidad* from its "footnote condition" in the US
historical archive. Further, centering narratives that consider the
above-mentioned geopolitical triangulation paves the way for a more
inclusive rubric of* dominicanidad* where plural subjects, dictions,
territories, and ethno-racial categories, such
as *rayano*, *dominicano*, Afro-Dominican, and Dominicanyork, are
recovered, recorded, and validated. García-Peña's *Borders of
Dominicanidad *is an open invitation to engage in a collective effort to
heal *las heridas abiertas *(Anzaldúa) that remain from structures of
violence bestowed upon racialized subjects. 

*Borders of Dominicanidad *is an indispensable resource to approach,
understand, and theorize Dominican identity from the margins.
García-Peña's theorizations on *contra/dictions, rayano
consciousness,* the*"ni é"*, and *dominicanidad ausente*, are four of
many concepts that have revolutionized and reshaped the epistemological
approaches to the study of *dominicanidad.* Finally, I would be remiss
not to highlight that *Borders of Dominicanidad *speaks to Lorgia
García-Peña's humanity and deep social justice
conscience, *dos constantes *in her quest to create just archives, even
if that means swimming against the current...

<br>

### Danny Mendez | Response:

While reading both of your detailed analyses of the profound
contributions of Lorgia García-Peña's book *The Borders of
Dominicanidad: Race, Nation and the Archives of Contradiction* (Duke UP,
2016) in Dominican, Caribbean, and African Diaspora Studies, I could not
stop thinking of the symbiosis of academic rigor and engaged community
practices **in her work**. In fact, for me, the mention of "Lorgia
García-Peña's work" materializes into a dual operation that is equal
parts incisive critical research (on gender, race, dominicanidad, border
studies), and also a deep commitment to challenging the contradictions
she finds in research and seeks to lessen in practice, and especially in
the realm of education. Lorgia García-Peña provides an indirect glimpse
into this when she writes in the book what motivates her research: "The
intellectual impulse guiding my investigation derives from a
preoccupation with the footnote condition that mutes Dominican
plurality, silencing stories and histories from both US and Dominican
archives" (5). And thus, learning about dominicanidad and its triangular
association with Haiti, the Dominican Republic and the United States and
its contradictory effect in the ways that race, gender, and a rayano
consciousness are written and/or performed into various archives, goes
hand in hand with Lorgia's community engagement and especially when we
think about her role as co-founder of Freedom University and her
constant devotion to inspiring and teaching all students.

            Her work has been central to my evolution as a Dominican
Studies scholar and especially because through her groundbreaking
proposition of analyzing dominicanidad as a category that "is inclusive
of subjects as well as the dictions that produce them" (3) has inspired
me to delve into analyzing other materials that are not solely
text-based and reside in alternate archives. Through Lorgia
García-Peña's, *The Borders of Dominicanidad*, and the historically
contextualized analysis she weaves there, I have gained alternate
theoretical paths that complicate and enrich concepts that prior to this
book I took for granted (i.e., rayano consciousness, dominicanidad, the
dominicano ausente trope). As a testament to the type of scholarship
that Lorgia's book is inspiring I posit my own as I am currently
developing my next project that is deeply connected and stimulated
by *The Borders of Dominicanidad*. Particularly, I am interested in
analyzing female performers, activists, and writers that have been
officially recognized as builders of Dominican culture abroad but whose
political and cultural positions are embedded in contradictory
practices. Undoubtedly, the path that Lorgia García-Peña paved in *The
Borders of Dominicanidad* continues to stretch forward in the subsequent
ideas and projects it has inspired.

<br>


