---
layout: post
section-type: post
comments: true
title: "From the Footnote to the Center of the Page"
summary: ""
pid: rt6
permalink: /roundtable/from-the-footnote/
authors:
  - name: Elizabeth Manley
    img: elizabeth-manley.jpg
    bio: "<a href='http://www2.xula.edu/history/faculty.html' target='_blank'>Elizabeth Manley</a> is an associate professor of history at Xavier University of Louisiana. Dr. Manley teaches courses in Latin American, Caribbean, and World history, as well as thematic courses covering areas of interest such as gender, politics, human rights, and revolution. Her research interests focus primarily on issues of gender and participation in politics, nationalism and revolution, and political change in the modern Caribbean. She is the author of <em>The Paradox of Paternalism: Women and Authoritarianism in the Dominican Republic</em> (University Press of Florida, 2017) and has essays in <em>The Journal of Women's History, Small Axe</em>, and <em>The Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Latin American History</em>."
  - name: Edward Paulino
    img: edward-paulino.jpg
    bio: 
        <a href='https://www.drpaulino.com/' target='_blank'>Edward Paulino</a> is a scholar, author, playwright, and Associate Professor at the CUNY John Jay College, Department of History. He leverages his insights on the history of genocide, race, border relations, nation building, Latin America/Caribbean, 1937 Haitian Massacre, and the African Diaspora. He is the co-founder of <a href='https://www.borderoflights.org/' target='_blank'>Border of Lights</a>, an organization created to commemorate the 75th anniversary of the 1937 Haitian Massacre. He is the author of <a href='https://upittpress.org/books/9780822963790/' target='_blank'><em>Dividing Hispaniola&#x3a; The Dominican Republic's Border Campaign against Haiti, 1930-1961</em></a> (University of Pittsburgh Press, 2016), and a solo performance piece, <a href='https://www.drpaulino.com/eddie-s-perejil'>Eddie's Perejil</a>.
---

This conversation features historians <a href="http://www2.xula.edu/history/faculty.html" target="_blank">Elizabeth Manley</a> (Xavier University) and <a href="https://www.drpaulino.com/" target="_blank">Edward Paulino</a> (John Jay College of Criminal Justice), who reflect on the contributions Lorgia García Peña's <em>The Borders of Dominicanidad</em> makes to the growing field of Dominican Studies. They also address the way the book draws attention to the crucial place of the Dominican Republic and Haiti in histories of the Caribbean, Latin America, and the African Diaspora. Both build from García Peña's insistence that studies of the Dominican Republic move "from the footnote to the center of the page," and what this means in relation to archival work.

---

<br>

### Elizabeth Manley | Begins:

Dear Eddie,

I'm excited to be able to contribute to this Ethnic Studies Rise!
conversation from the perspective of Dominican Studies, something you
and I are both a part of as historians of Hispaniola and the Caribbean.
In reading the first [exchange between Robin D. G. Kelly and Laurent
Dubois](https://ethnicrise.github.io/roundtable/black-radical-tradition/),
I was struck particularly by a comment about institutional spaces,
exclusion, and violence, particularly as they pertain to a certain
anecdote that Lorgia García Peña tells at the opening of *The Borders of
Dominicanidad*. As Dubois writes, "we all see it in our different
institutions. It takes different forms, frequently combining proud
parochialism of Eurocentrism and disciplinary bordering with racialized
habits of mind." These patterns of exclusion that they are talking
about, of course, have been central to the marginalization of scholarly
work on Haiti and the Dominican Republic (and, even, within work on
Haiti and the Dominican Republic), and are things that our own work
grapples with.

In [the introduction to her
book](https://read.dukeupress.edu/books/book/17/chapter/96988/IntroductionDominicanidad-in-Contradiction)
Lorgia argues---as I think we often find ourselves required to
do---that the work brings *dominicanidad *"from the footnote to the
center of the page" (3). For many of us, this work of centering a
footnote is a primary concern. We are often asked to demonstrate "why"
the Dominican Republic matters and how it relates to Latin America more
broadly. I don't necessarily dispute this editorial practice, as it
helps expand our work to more encompassing audiences, but I sometimes
resist and want to ask why U.S. or European historians do not have to
defend *their* geographical choices. Yet, returning to García Peña's
work, I believe we can definitively say that it *has* centered issues of
blackness and Dominican national identity, for a wide variety of
scholarly circles. But what I feel even more strongly about is the ways
her scholarship highlights the broader centrality of the island nation
and its diasporic community. Shining a spotlight on the place where the
identities of the Americas were first forged, through forced labor,
colonial imprints of hierarchy, and Christianizing missions, and later
through imperialism, elite and authoritarian control, and migration, is
critical to an entire hemispheric understanding of these very same
ideas.

For many of us, choosing to build a scholarly career around the
Dominican Republic, or even Caribbean Studies, was not a decision wildly
applauded by our early mentors and advisors. They might have told us to
focus on a country that was more "significant" like Mexico or Brazil, or
perhaps that "no one cared" about the island and its stories. For some,
this "advice" came with significant scholarly bullying and forced us to
fiercely defend this place (and our place within it) that we found,
often through intense passion and love, to be at the center of a nexus
of race, identity, belonging, and, yes, contradictions. Ten or fifteen
years ago these scholars might not have been totally to blame in pushing
us away from a place so much of the scholarly community had denied and
obfuscated, if merely for practical reasons. But what García Peña's work
does, so masterfully, is to prove that the very opposite---and
ultimately what we believe---is true. That is, that the Dominican
Republic is, to quote April Mayes, the very "center of the universe" or,
at least, the center of a universe of ideas that ground the scholarly
work we hope to accomplish, that scholarly work of centering footnotes.

And that brings me to another point that I wanted to raise, particularly
from my perspective as an intensely archival-focused historian. Framing
national identity through the use of an "archive" as García Peña
does---through a wealth of diverse historical and literary
artifacts---is not only a brilliant conceptual move and a model to be
engaged in other places and narratives, but it reminds us of the
significance of the past and all its stories to contemporary narratives
of belonging. We know that the silences of history and the archive, [as
Michel-Rolph Trouillot
argues](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/246609/silencing-the-past-20th-anniversary-edition-by-michel-rolph-trouillot/),
are powerful, ubiquitous, and unrelenting. The erasures both around and
within the Dominican narrative work toward a political present that
excludes and marginalizes. But we mustn't cave to these silences, and
García Peña's intellectual labors---on the page, as an activist, and in
the classroom---demonstrate that such work is not just the purview of
the historian, but *anyone* who cares about how we comprehend and create
identity and belonging *anywhere*.

Looking forward to reading your thoughts!

<br>

### Edward Paulino | Responds:

Yes, Beth, I totally agree. I, too, was struck by the poignant exchange
between Kelley and Dubois, two scholars whom I have come to know and
who, like García Peña, did not just make critical contributions to our
fields, but also, like García Peña, have shown a commitment to examining
in writing the history of ordinary citizens in Haiti and the United
States. They have thought seriously and intensely about honoring their
lives by putting and/or framing their histories at the center, but also,
just as crucially, dedicating time outside of the classroom and the
archives to supporting undergraduate and graduate students as
indefatigable mentors.

It is truly an honor for me to be discussing García Peña's work with
you. Her book, *The Borders of Dominicanidad*, is so refreshing (from
the historiography of the "Galindo Virgins" to the global war on
blackness via Anzaldúa), because she is able to connect the history of
the Hispaniola with broader scholarly conversations in a very timely
way. Think: Caribbean, African diaspora, and women\'s histories meet
Latinx history.

I love how she frames her book in "five historical episodes" (12). From
the very beginning she reminds the reader that how you frame a story
matters. By citing her introduction you aptly reminded me about the
importance of re-framing narratives and bringing the footnotes up to the
center of the page. These footnotes on Caribbean, black, women's, and
diasporic histories that traditionally have been relegated to the
historiographical margins, now viewed with a different frame can become
the center of the narratives of empire and ordinary people.

Take the chapter on the massacre, ["Speaking in Silences: Literary
Interruptions and the Massacre of
1937."](https://read.dukeupress.edu/books/book/17/chapter/97051/Speaking-in-SilencesLiterary-Interruptions-and-the)
Anyone familiar with the historiography of the 1937 Massacre will
reflexively say that only Haitians were killed. But García Peña extends
us an invitation, saying, Stop! Let's reframe. Where are the silences?
In [the
introduction](https://read.dukeupress.edu/books/book/17/chapter/96988/IntroductionDominicanidad-in-Contradiction),
she writes that she "examines how hegemonic \'truths\' contribute to the
violence, silencing, and erasure of racialized people and their truths\"
(13). Who would have been killed during the massacre in 1937? In other
words, how were Haitians targeted in 1937? How were they profiled? Race.
Skin color. García Peña rightly renames (reframes) the massacre as a
genocide ([as do I](https://upittpress.org/books/9780822963790/)): a
genocide specifically of "the multiethnic Afro-Hispaniola rayano
population" (95). (This probably is the first time I've ever seen that
phrasing but it makes so much sense! It fits! What about
Afro-Hispaniolians, or Afro-Quisqueyanos? And this may be redundant, but
Afro-Rayanos, which in English might be Afro-borderlanders?) She reminds
her readers to reexamine the term that also comes out of an archive of
myths, namely, the myth that only Haitians were killed. Afro-Dominicans
were also killed.

But to the point: the common denominator of the victims was their
perceived blackness by the Dominican army and police. García Peña
attacks the elite-driven foundations and archives of a Western-oriented
*dominicanidad* and connects the massacre with the 2013 ruling of the
Dominican Constitutional Tribunal (TC 168-13), which effectively
stripped nationality from hundreds of thousands of Dominicans, the vast
majority of Haitian descent. She challenges us to see the 1937 Massacre
and the denationalization of Dominicans of Haitian descent as a historic
pattern of unceasing anti-black state violence, the victims of which
litter and span the island of Hispaniola and extend beyond its border.

Her aim in this book is not just to expose and call out these myths. It
also "offers a way out of the discursive checkmate that persistently
produces Dominicans and Haitians as racial opposites" (10). I love that
last line. She is locating familiar archives, ripping them open, and
then re-configuring the parts. She reminds us that El Nié, birthed to us
by the brilliant performance artist Josefina Baez, can be used to
examine and understand the Dominican diaspora's peculiar "ambivalence"
and "alterity" (4). We *can* use El Nié to create or make sense of our
own diasporic archives that we carry with us, as a crowbar to pry open
or destroy old psychic boxes that contain too many myths that have
brought us to the point of delusion, violence, political paralysis and
moral laxity. That have brought us to amnesia.

García Peña uses the word contra*diction* with "diction" italicized as a
powerful analytical and subversive tool to uncover silences and read and
re-read against myths. We also read and re-read the very archives that
contain these myths in order to "demonstrate *how* Latino/a voices,
bodies, and dictions are silenced from multiple archives across time and
geographies, but it also simultaneously creates an alternative archive
that allows readers, if they so choose, to read in contra*diction*"
(11). Her book can very well be described as a new \"genealogy of
dominicanidad\" (12).

You are right, Beth: García Peña does not cave to the silences. In *The
Borders of Dominicanidad*, she reminds us that historical moments in the
Dominican Republic represent case studies of larger historical
challenges and present-day threats globally. This book, like her
teaching in and outside the classroom is, as she writes, "my way to
respond to the growing anti-immigrant and anti-black violence
devastating our (my) present world. Speaking about the need for a more
conscientious scholarship that engages in actually dismantling
oppression rather than simply critiquing it, Barbara Tomlinson and
George Lipsitz argue that scholars need to 'know the work we want our
work to do' and how our scholarship can serve to accompany positive
changes in our society" (211).

I mean, that's all you need to know about García Peña. Like Paulo
Freire, her scholarship and pedagogy are intertwined but serve the same
purpose: liberation.

<br>