---
layout: post
section-type: post
comments: true
title: "Racial Interpellation in the Academy"
summary: ""
pid: rt6
permalink: /roundtable/racial-interpellation/
authors:
  - name: Joseph M. Pierce
    img: joseph-pierce.jpg
    bio: "Joseph M. Pierce is Associate Professor in the Department of Hispanic Languages and Literature at Stony Brook University. His research focuses on the intersections of kinship, gender, sexuality, and race in Latin America, 19<sup>th</sup> century literature and culture, queer studies, Indigenous studies, and hemispheric approaches to citizenship and belonging. He is the author of <em>Argentine Intimacies: Queer Kinship in an Age of Splendor, 1890-1910</em> (SUNY Press, 2019) and co-editor of <em>Políticas del amor: Derechos sexuales y escrituras disidentes en el Cono Sur</em> (Cuarto Propio, 2018) as well as the forthcoming special issue of <em>GLQ</em>, &#34;Queer/Cuir Américas: Translation, Decoloniality, and the Incommensurable.&#34; His work has been published recently in <em>Taller de Letras</em>, <em>Revista Hispánica Moderna</em>, <em>Critical Ethnic Studies</em>, and has also been featured in <em>Indian Country Today</em>. He is a citizen of the Cherokee Nation."
  - name: Kaiama L. Glover
    img: kaiama-glover.jpg
    bio: "Kaiama L. Glover is Ann Whitney Olin Professor of French & Africana Studies at Barnard College, Columbia University. Her teaching and research interests include francophone literature, particularly that of Haiti and the French Antilles; colonialism and postcolonialism; and sub-Saharan francophone African cinema. She is the author of <em>Haiti Unbound: A Spiralist Challenge to the Postcolonial Canon</em> (Liverpool UP 2010) and has published articles in <em>The French Review</em>, <em>Small Axe</em>, <em>Research in African Literatures</em>, <em>The Journal of Postcolonial Writings</em>, and <em>The Journal of Haitian Studies</em>, among others, and has co-edited and translated several works. She is founding co-editor of <em><a href='http://smallaxe.net/sxarchipelagos/'>archipelagos: a journal of Caribbean digital studies</a></em> and founding co-director of the digital humanities project [In the Same Boats: Toward an Afro-Atlantic Intellectual Cartography](https://sameboats.org/). Her most recent monograph, <em>Disorderly Women: On Caribbean Community and the Ethics of Self-Regard</em>, is forthcoming with Duke University Press in 2020."
---

Offering a set of provocations and invitations, Joseph M. Pierce (Stony Brook University) and Kaiama L. Glover (Barnard College) dialogue about the vulnerability of the Indigenous, black, and brown person in academia, and the solidarities, alliances, and kinship forged between black and brown intellectuals that pose a real threat to academic institutions. Building from Lorgia García Peña’s tenure denial, Pierce and Glover move from the structural violence attending their positions in academia to push us to think harder about how we do the work of decoloniality and/in Ethnic Studies. 

---

<br>

### Joseph Pierce | Writes:

I\'ve been feeling the feelings of brownness. I think about this all the
time as an Indigenous person in the Academe. I am reminded in class and
in my office and on the street and in meetings. It\'s a feeling of
loneliness, really, and it comes from being statistically insignificant.
Being an asterisk or a footnote to diversity statistics, to dropdown
menus, to methodological framings. \"We don\'t have enough of you to
even include you in the diversity study,\" and in the same breath, \"but
we recognize we are on unceded XXXX Indian land.\" What the fuck does
that mean? That is where my mind went when I saw that García-Peña was
denied tenure. In truth, this has been on my mind because I was just
granted tenure. Is that feeling also shame? Is it guilt?

I don\'t know. Maybe it has to do with the ways that Black-Brown kinship
has also been on my mind because of the times, and because of the work
that I am trying to do. Not so much as a thing of writing, but of doing,
of being. This is what García-Peña does in [the introduction of *The
Borders of
Dominicanidad*](https://read.dukeupress.edu/books/book/17/chapter/96988/IntroductionDominicanidad-in-Contradiction),
too. She opens with a scene of racialized interpellation. She takes her
body, its contra*dictions*, as a site of feeling those feelings. What
else do we have, at the end of the day? But for me, this feeling of
insignificance is the product of the racialized structures that we
inhabit, traverse, uncomfortably, as racialized folks in the academe.
The university is a violent place. It is. We have to start there. It is
violent for its gatekeeping, its knowledge brokering, for its double
speak, its contra*dictions*.

Lorgia calls this the \"footnote condition\" (3). I think of it as
(statistical) insignificance. Because for Native folks what goes between
those parentheses matters\--it defines to a certain extent how we are
imagined as belonging to land, community, spirituality, and knowledge.
Especially to knowledge. For me, what does (Cherokee) mean? What would
happen if we were to bring ourselves out of those parentheses\--out of
that footnote condition\--and into the center? That is the decolonial
ethics that García-Peña makes plain. That is why her work is dangerous.
That is why, for the white supremacist academe, she is dangerous. She
makes plain the racist truths of our conditions of employment, its
conditions, its underlying incommensurability with the work of
decolonality.

### Kaiama Glover | Responds:

For me, and I think for many of us, black and brown and otherwise
"other" in the Academy, the affective is where we find ourselves
dwelling---stuck, even---in the wake of Harvard\'s denial of tenure to
Lorgia García-Peña. Each and every one of us has a story that falls
somewhere on the continuum of that denial---a painful moment of
misidentification, dismissal, or (inadvertent?) insult. Racialized
interpellation [à la
Fanon](https://groveatlantic.com/book/black-skin-white-masks/), yes.
We\'re calling it "microaggression" these days, though the prefix feels
oxymoronic. Insufficient. Whether we\'ve made it through tenure or not
(and this matters immensely, yes), we cannot help but know and *feel*
ourselves to be singular, exceptional, and odds-beating---and not in a
good way. Each of us remains largely in the footnote, well-aware of our
own isolation and precarity.

Our collective investment in Ethnic Studies as a field is of a piece
with our collective outrage (indignation? despair?) at the acts of
violence, both "micro" and structural, that condition our existence as
scholars and teachers. In the face of our precarity, Ethnic Studies
proposes an ever-expanding set of alternatives to the narratives that
limit and delimit black and brown existence. As a field, it exhorts us
to acknowledge the hard work of embodiment *we do all the time*. And
García-Peña's scholarship is an exemplary iteration of what this field
can mean and make visible. Grounded in body-based knowledge in the
tradition of [Cherrie Moraga](https://cherriemoraga.com/), [Gloria
Anzaldúa](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poets/gloria-e-anzaldua), and
other foremothers, her work makes plain the cost of defying supremacist
narratives both through study and through the very fact of presence. To
be a brown body in certain spaces, exploring narratives that contest or
at the very least nuance and trouble persistent colonial epistemes, is
to be at risk.

Exploring realities that nuance and/or refute the defining gaze of
putatively former empire is not the only risk García-Peña takes. She
works at the borders of race and geography, and dares to look hard at
the microaggressions---often learned on the lap or at the feet of
colonial powers---that fracture relations among those who should be kin.
[Hortense Spillers called this intramural
conflict](https://www.press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/B/bo3624045.html),
and it is a phenomenon García-Peña addresses with sensitivity and great
insight. Her deeply researched and eloquently related reading of
Dominicanidad in the long-historical wake and contemporary face of
Haitian "blackness" is an opening and an airing out. It is a careful
articulation of the specific pressure points that have weakened bonds of
communication between like peoples, that have rendered translation
utterly fraught. Like Spillers, García-Peña pays attention to the
grammar of subjection, the "passive voice interference" that refuses to
recognize perpetrators while turning victims against one another (13).

But if it is true that our mutual positionality as peoples of diaspora
and empire is, above all, a question of narrative---of stories that
precede our bodies and our experiences---then García-Peña\'s efforts to
relate more truthful stories, told with the right grammar, present a
path to recognition. Her work is a bringing out of the parentheses that
means to clarify us *for* us; it is a crafting of [Wynterian
truth-*fors*](https://muse.jhu.edu/article/51630) that foregrounds
experiences and worldviews that escape (yes, contradict) the language
and logics of the North Atlantic center. Her kind of work is not for the
faint-of-heart. It has stakes and it has consequences, as we have seen
once again. And as we have seen once again, the "conditions of
employment" in our(?) Academy lack both clarity and justice. Reprisal is
real. 

Is the empire afraid? Are its gatekeepers truly worried about what
Ethnic Studies can do -- about what its most brilliant thinkers will
persist in thinking and teaching? Do they truly believe Lorgia
García-Peña\'s work to be dangerous? Who knows. That\'s unclear as yet.
But let us work, now, continuing in our way and in our spaces, to assure
that it is so.






