---
layout: post
section-type: post
comments: true
title: "War on Ethnic Studies: Ethnic Studies Rising"
summary: ""
pid: rt7
permalink: /roundtable/war-ethnic-studies/
authors:
  - name: "P. Gabrielle Foreman"
    img: gabrielle-foreman.jpg
    bio: "P. Gabrielle Foreman is the Ned B. Allen Professor of English with appointments in History and Africana Studies and is a Senior Library Research Fellow at the University of Delaware. She has published extensively on issues of race, slavery and reform in the nineteenth century, with a focus on the past's continuing hold on the world we inhabit today. Foreman is the author of <em>Activist Sentiments: Reading Black Women Writers</em> (U Illinois, 2009) and editor of the Penguin edition of Harriet Wilson’s <em>Our Nig; or, Sketches for the Life of a Free Black</em> (2009). Her forthcoming monograph is entitled <em>The Art of DisMemory: Historicizing Slavery in Poetry, Performance, and Material Culture</em>. Foreman is the founding faculty director of the <a href=&#x22;https://coloredconventions.org/&#x22;>Colored Conventions Project</a> (CCP) and with CCP co-founders Jim Casey and Sarah Patterson is co-editing the forthcoming volume, <em>Colored Conventions in the Nineteenth Century and the Digital Age.</em>"
  - name: Dylan Rodríguez
    img: dylan-rodriguez.jpg
    bio: "Dylan Rodríguez is President-Elect of the American Studies Association (2020-2021), the faculty-elected Chair of the UC Riverside Academic Senate (2016-2020) and a Professor at the University of California, Riverside. He spent the first sixteen years of his career in the Department of Ethnic Studies, serving as Chair from 2009-2016 and joined the Department of Media and Cultural Studies in 2017. He is the author of two books: <em>Forced Passages: Imprisoned Radical Intellectuals and the U.S. Prison Regime</em> (University of Minnesota Press, 2006) and <em>Suspended Apocalypse: White Supremacy, Genocide, and the Filipino Condition</em> (University of Minnesota Press, 2009).  His next book, <em>White Reconstruction</em>, will be published by Fordham University Press in 2020 and will be followed in 2021 by <em>White Reconstruction II</em>."
  - name: Jessica Marie Johnson
    img: jessica-johnson.jpg
    bio: "Jessica Marie Johnson is an Assistant Professor of History at the Johns Hopkins University. Johnson is a historian of Atlantic slavery and the Atlantic African diaspora. She is the author of <em>Wicked Flesh: Black Women, Intimacy, and Freedom in the Atlantic World (</em>University of Pennsylvania Press, August 2020). She is co-editor of <em>Computational Digital Humanities (Debates in the Digital Humanities)</em> with Lauren Tilton and David Mimno, guest editor of Slavery in the Machine, a special issue of <em>sx:archipelagos</em> (2019), and co-editor with Mark Anthony Neal of <em>Black Code: A Special Issue of the Black Scholar</em> (2017). Her work has appeared in <em>Slavery &amp; Abolition, The Black Scholar, Meridians: Feminism, Race and Transnationalism, American Quarterly, Social Text, The Journal of African American History, the William &amp; Mary Quarterly, Debates in the Digital Humanities, Forum Journal, Bitch Magazine, Black Perspectives (AAIHS), Somatosphere and Post-Colonial Digital Humanities (DHPoco)</em> and her book chapters have appeared in multiple edited collections"
---

This conversation features Gabrielle Foreman, Dylan Rodriguez, and
Jessica Marie Johnson, who carry forward earlier exchanges in this
roundtable on why Ethnic Studies matters now. Each writer trenchantly
indicts the academy for its war on the people working in Ethnic Studies
and associated fields of study (Black/Africana Studies, Indigenous
Studies, Caribbean Studies, Latinx Studies, Women's, Gender and
Sexuality Studies, Queer Studies, American Studies). In their respective
pieces, they counterpose this war with the powerful solidarity each has
experienced through Ethnic Studies work, as part of wider communities
struggling in, against, and beyond the academy.

---

<br>

### Gabrielle Foreman | Writes:

When I walked---OK, sped---away from New England and left its storied,
pedigreed graduate programs behind to instead enroll in a new PhD
program in Ethnic Studies at UC Berkeley, it didn't feel like the gamble
perhaps it was, it felt like freedom. By then, the surge that came with
dramatically overperforming racial presumptions in the classes that made
up my major had lost its power. I wanted none of it, even if it came
with job placement promises that a new Ethnic Studies department, with
no students past their comprehensive exams even, couldn't yet provide.
In my first years, I TAed for Cherrie Moraga and studied with Barbara
Christian, Ron Takaki, Margaret Washington and Earl Lewis. No longer
compelled to jump constantly over low expectations and manage the
surprise when we didn't trip or stumble, my peers and I conserved our
intellectual energy for the rigor, research and writing Ethnic Studies
scholars and scholarship demanded.

If I were not writing this today, I'd be trying to finish an article I'm
calling "Sankofa Imperatives: Historical Recovery and the Archival Turn"
that opens by revisiting the disciplinary resistance Barbara Christian
faced when, at twenty seven, she took her first tenure track job in the
English department at Berkeley. There, as she told it to generations who
would return to the warning wrapped in her words, her colleagues
insisted that there wasn't a *real* tradition to support [a *scholarly*
monograph about Black women's
literature](https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/000739802).

Having to wade through---or wave off---the thick and heavy incredulity
that there are Black pasts to recover, historicize, and theorize is both
nothing new and always new. It reaches from the thinking at Harvard that
necessitated this forum, back to Thomas Jefferson's dismissive letter to
Black astrologer and mathematician Benjamin Banneker; it spills from the
mouths and pens of generations of Western philosophers and statesmen,
through centuries of intellectual gatekeepers who have not only
questioned, but have erased and buried the thinking and writing that
Black people in the Americas have produced against those who bet against
us for pleasure or profit. The faith in (Black) human creativity (even
as others deny our connection to either humanity or creativity) sent
[Alice Walker, for instance, to seek and find Zora Neale
Hurston](http://www.pbs.org/wnet/americanmasters/alice-walker-film-excerpt-walker-puts-zora-neale-hurston-back-in-spotlight/2869/),
to place a headstone on her unmarked grave and to republish what we now
treasure as a once lost masterpiece, *Their Eyes Were Watching God*.
Likewise, June Jordan's assumption that Black literary soil has loam
enough to sprout generations of genius spurred her to commemorate
Phillis Wheatley and [the difficult miracle of Black poetry in
America](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/articles/68628/the-difficult-miracle-of-black-poetry-in-america).
It sent García Peña to the letters, papers and memos that document *[The
Borders of Dominicanidad: Race, Nations and Archives of
Contradictions](https://read.dukeupress.edu/books/book/17/The-Borders-of-DominicanidadRace-Nation-and)*.

What does it mean to create, to master creativity, in the glint of the
steeliest historical and disciplinary negation?

García Peña's tenure denial in the face of such prize-winning,
unqualified, exclamatory excellence, signals the barb-wired border
between the individual merit and intellectual achievement that is enough
for the Academy's accepted intellectual citizens, and the collective
badge of disciplinary exclusion that marks us as scholarly exiles. The
institutional gate-keepers at the highest level are articulating this in
the clearest of dictions: we don't care how celebrated or acclaimed you
are, that you enjoy the highest honors and prizes in your area of
scholarship or the highest praise in your classrooms, you can't possibly
scale the intellectual, civic, and social borders that we build and move
so we can control what is worthy of our acceptance, inclusion, and
regard.

Ethnic Studies emerges from a necessary history of organizing as well as
scholarly and pedagogical rigor and institution building. And its
genealogies and teleologies may lead us to this: if Harvard is so
clearly marking the body of our work as foreign and unwanted, it may be
time to suspend a long and unequal relationship and to withhold our
labor: no rankings and reviews, no letters of recommendation for its
graduate or fellowship programs. That may be one way in which Ethnic
Studies and its aligned, maligned, fields of Black Studies, Indigenous
Studies, Caribbean Studies, and Latinx Studies, matter powerfully today.

<br>

### Dylan Rodriguez | Responds:

Echoing Gabrielle Foreman, i affirm Ethnic Studies as a dynamic
intellectual project that continues to nourish a growing body of
knowledge, creativity, and collective pedagogy. It can and must play a
vital role in abolishing the university as a creation of the modern
white world. Yet, as a graduate of the UC Berkeley Ethnic Studies Ph.D.
program (1995-2001) and former chair of UC Riverside's Department of
Ethnic Studies (2009-2016), i must confess that i do not view Ethnic
Studies as a *uniformly* "radical" project in these times, in part
because its uneven institutionalizations have cultivated deep, unevenly
shared desires for academic respectability and professional recognition
among its students, faculty (tenured and tenure-track, contingent, and
otherwise), career scholars, administrators, and other practitioners.

The primary "academic" problem faced by Ethnic Studies is not an
inadequacy of institutional recognition or insufficient/obstructed
access to the regimes of academic respectability. Rather, it is the fact
that its scholarship---of which Lorgia García Peña's work is so
obviously exemplary---represents some of the most transformative,
epistemologically and theoretically challenging, critically and publicly
engaged work to emerge from the academy in the last half century. In
producing such field---and academy---altering work, Ethnic Studies
represents the elite research university's (e.g. Harvard et. al.'s)
antithesis.

It is worth recalling, over and again, that the modern university is a
foundationally colonial, plantation chattel enterprise. A vibrant,
growing movement for university reparations is magnifying the long
historical centrality of anti-Black violence and racial slavery to the
economic, academic, and cultural infrastructures of Georgetown,
Princeton, Yale, Brown, and of course Harvard, among other places (see
the [Scholars for Social Justice
platform](http://scholarsforsocialjustice.com/reparations-in-higher-education/)
on reparations in higher education). The global solidarity with the
ongoing Kanaka Maoli (Native Hawai'ian) struggle to protect the sacred
site of Mauna Kea from the invasive Thirty Meter Telescope (in which my
employer has a major stake) further illustrates how the militarized
procedures of conquest remain central to the settler university
enterprise (see [the global
petition](https://www.change.org/p/gordon-and-betty-moore-foundation-the-immediate-halt-to-the-construction-of-the-tmt-on-mauna-kea?use_react=false)
that has garnered almost 300,000 signatories). Make no mistake: the
thriving university-focused reparations movement and struggle at Mauna
Kea indicate the *continuity and persistence* of the modern university's
anti-Black, carceral-chattel, colonial settler-conquest logic as the
economic, philosophical, scientific, and bureaucratic conditions of
possibility for the making of the academy as such.

Further, as many of Harvard's students (and a dozen of Yale's Ethnic
Studies faculty) have recently made clear, the self-valorizing diversity
mandates of ostensibly "liberal" Ivy League universities are public
spectacles of racial-colonial philanthropy: their commitment to a public
relations optics of (long overdue) undergraduate student demographic
change is simultaneously, tacitly animated by a systemic, reflexive,
though no less *willful* illiteracy and anti-intellectual reaction
against the living, present tense archives of thought, art, and truth
that expose, undermine, and potentially obliterate the modern academy's
fundamental commitment to a white supremacist, colonial, chattel
episteme.

There is no better occasion to cultivate a collective discussion of
whether and how to inhabit these poisoned, wretched places than in
celebration of a colleague like García Peña, who represents everything
that the traditional denizens of elite research universities can neither
intellectually comprehend nor viscerally tolerate. This is why i think
it is worth dwelling for a bit on Gabrielle's assertion that this
particular tenure case "signals the barb-wired border between the
individual merit and intellectual achievement that is enough for the
Academy's accepted intellectual citizens, and the collective badge of
disciplinary exclusion that marks us as scholarly exiles." Her words are
another devastating reminder of the academy's relentless commitment to
advancing---and militantly defending---the particular institutional and
intellectual space of "the scholarly" as a primary manifestation of
"Civilization," which is to say, the academy is a plantation-frontier
regime that its managers and executives *oversee as such.*

This is why it is no exaggeration to suggest that the university---its
administrators and many of its faculty, staff, and students---encounters
radical, publicly engaged, productive scholars like García Peña as a
principal threat to the carceral law-and-order of its disciplinary,
aesthetic, and epistemological foundations, as well as its everyday
corporate comportment. When encountering such people on campus,
particularly if their work flows in the streams of Black radical, anti-
and decolonial, and/or radical feminist traditions, the university
mobilizes to neutralize the insurgency, girding its bottomless access to
a soulless legal apparatus that will wage juridical wars of attrition
*to the death.* (To emphasize the latter point: serious illness and
early death are a commonly understood, shared occupational hazard of the
hostile academy for those who commit to challenging its systemic,
normalized, violent normativities of thought, intellectual community,
and bodily/affective presence.) 

This exercise of Harvard's propertied, subtly weaponized white
supremacist episteme against García Peña amplifies an already existing
obligation to organize politically activated, rigorously creative forms
of *extra-*academic praxis among the practitioners of diasporic Black
studies, anti- and decolonial praxis, radical feminism, Indigenous and
Native studies, trans and queer studies, Latinx studies, Asian American
studies, settler colonial studies, and other critically positioned
fields in and beyond Ethnic Studies.

It is the least we can do to abolish the ascendancy of White Being that
toxifies these grounds and parasitically saps all other life by relying
on places like Harvard to serve as its prestige-ridden centers of
command. Guided by Sylvia Wynter's radical critique of European and
Euroamerican humanism and "Man," i understand White Being as the
militarized, normative paradigm of *human* being that inhabitants of the
ongoing half-millennial civilizational project have involuntarily
inherited as a violent universal. Wynter's durable contribution to Black
Studies and the critical humanities facilitates a conceptualization of
White Being as a narrative, ceremonial, ritualized practice of human
being that pivots on relations of dominance with other beings (human and
otherwise) and aspirational mastery over the wildness and unknowability
of nature and the physical universe. White Being's *ascendancy,* in
turn, requires perpetual mobilizations of (legitimated state and
extra-state) violence and colonial-chattel power that form the premises
of the degrading, negating, and deadly differentiations that Gabrielle
invokes in the passage above: "border," "individual merit,"
"intellectual citizens," "disciplinary exclusion," "scholarly exiles." In
White Being's ascendancy, there is nothing less than an authoritarian
Universal, a compulsory call to war that *calls on the university to
commodify, occupy, expropriate, exploit, destroy, and/or criminalize*
 all other human species' *ways of knowing and being.* This war, i
think, is precisely what i and others  are attempting to engage as part
of a sustained guerilla action---above ground and underground, utilizing
every possible resource at our disposal to the purposes of short-term
survival, institutional counter-inhabitation, sustainable collective
insurgency, and a radical/abolitionist/revolutionary futurity. 

This is all to say that the work of Ethnic Studies---including and
especially its recent rearticulation as critical ethnic studies (check
out [*Critical Ethnic Studies: a
Reader*](https://www.dukeupress.edu/critical-ethnic-studies))---is not
only an exemplification of some of the most innovative and original
"interdisciplinary" scholarship in the social sciences and humanities,
but also forms a vital center of gravity for *counter*- and
*anti*-disciplinary study. By this i mean forms of pedagogy, analysis,
research, archive-building, and creative knowledge production that
eradicate the ascendancy of White Being that anchors, manages, and
defends "disciplinary" thought as the academy's sanctified ideological
premise. Ethnic Studies reflects and magnifies the already existing,
long historical praxis of peoples on the underside of the Civilization
project whose distinctive, collective genius is carried in the work of
colleagues like García Peña.  

How can Ethnic Studies instigate movement toward a point of no return
for Harvard and other such places? To the same point, is it a worthwhile
political project to push them toward their points of no return? I raise
these questions to reflect on my participation in [a special issue of *Harvard Law Review*](https://harvardlawreview.org/issues/volume-132-issue-6/) in
2019, addressing prison and police abolition. As recently as three or
four years ago, it would have been difficult to imagine this prestigious
journal curating contributions from people like Patrisse Cullors, Angel
E. Sanchez, Allegra M. McLeod, Dorothy Roberts, and myself, given our
shared radical commitments to abolishing a carceral world. Such an
invitation becomes less surprising, however, when cohorts of curious,
courageous, freedom-oriented students and colleagues are making these
moves, creating these projects, expanding these spaces so others can
breathe, laugh, shout, and cuss as much as they damn well please---this
exemplifies a small but significant front in what my undergraduate
mentor Dr. James Turner (founding Director of Cornell's Africana Studies
and Research Center) once called "intellectual guerilla warfare."

Maybe, then, the work of intellectual guerilla war can provide momentum
to push the academy to a point of no return, and to make the university
unrecognizable to itself. That would be a beautiful thing.

<br>

### Jessica Marie Johnson | Joins:

I feel very ambivalent about writing and commenting in this roundtable.

I stand with Lorgia. I stand for Lorgia. I am Lorgia, in the sense that
untenured faculty members of color, particularly womxn, particularly
those of non-white, non-Anglo, and non-Western communities (like the
territorialized lands of Ayiti and Borinken, now known by the names
given to them during overlapping waves of Spanish, French, and United
States conquest as Haiti, the Dominican Republic, and Puerto Rico) are
fighting for their lives.

Dylan, you described the university as "a foundationally colonial,
plantation chattel enterprise," and it is true. Scholars of color,
almost despite and regardless of their radical politics, are at the
mercy of war being waged by the university against itself. It is a war
\"to the death\" and, in fact, women of color have died fighting: Audre
Lorde, June Jordan, Barbara Christian, Nellie McKay, Stephanie Camp,
Vèvè Clark, and more. We die doing work that is already hard, walking
through archives dripping in our blood and the blood of our kin, and it
is made harder because the university is determined to reproduce itself
in spite of the poison its politics have wrought. Earlier in this forum,
[Roopika Risam](https://ethnicrise.github.io/roundtable/ethnic-studies-now/)
reminds us Atlantic slaving and plantation complex in the Caribbean
generated horrific profits that flowed into university coffers. As a
historian of slavery, I have also followed the lawsuit being waged
against Harvard by Tamara Lanier and a descendant of Renty and Delia, an
enslaved man and his daughter who were photographed by Louis Agassiz in 1850. Lanier ([joined, interestingly enough, by descendants of Agassiz](https://www.thecrimson.com/article/2019/6/21/agassiz-family-says-give-up-photos/))
has charged Harvard with illegally possessing (\#slavery) the
photographs of her ancestors and requests their return. As that legal
case unfolds, I am also struck by the response of some academic
historians to the profound and beautiful
[\#1619Project](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/08/14/magazine/1619-america-slavery.html),
a collection of essays, poetry, stories, and artwork commemorating the
1619 landing of Africans at present-day Point Comfort, Virginia, a
project led by Nikole Hannah-Jones of the New York Times.

In each of these cases, Lorgia García Peña\'s included, the University
has made a claim. The University---either by itself or through its
proxies---has made a determination of ownership, of extraction, of
coloniality, and they have cloaked it in expertise, objectivity,
seniority, and so-called excellence. And, I want to note (because it is
important for whatever comes next), that a university is also just a
structure, an edifice, a building, an email account. So what I mean to
say is that in each of these cases, people---representatives of the
University, representatives of what Dylan is describing as White Being,
those who have taken into and of and onto themselves the power to
determine who lives and who dies, whose work thrives and whose ways of
knowing deserve to be exterminated---have decided to reproduce the
University *to the death* and the bodies littering the ground are
blackened, feminized, and have no right to papers (be they freedom
papers, tenure conferrals, citizenship documents, or otherwise).

At the same time, we who do Ethnic Studies see this clearly. Ethnic
Studies, particularly in its intersection with Black or Africana
Studies, Women, Gender & Sexuality Studies, Queer Studies, and American
Studies, sees this clearly. I agree with Dylan that Ethnic Studies *in
and of itself* is not or no longer a radical project. Imagine, then, how
ridiculous it would be to deny someone of García Peña\'s scholarly
record tenure? How terrified the guardians of the Tower must be of this
rebellion, this "insurrection," to take up [Frances Negrón-Mutaner](https://ethnicrise.github.io/roundtable/ethnic-studies-now/)\'s
phrasing in this same forum, an insurgency now decades in formation. The
overwrought response to critical Ethnic Studies work reminds me that the
uprising enslaved Africans initiated on the Northern Plain of what is
now Haiti was spurred in part by the multiple and massive denials of
rights by officials in France who sent Vincent Ogé back to the Caribbean
with fire in his eyes, who rejected Julien Raimond\'s quite liberal and
reformist (and, thus, pro-slavery) overtures; as well as being the
product of overseers who raised the whip one too many times, of
plantation owners who refused to concede their White Being until the
fight for freedom had set fire to their homes. In other words, empire
will suffer nothing to impede on itself which is why black freedom has
always exceeded the manumission act, has always transgressed the power
of paper to constrain it, will always be irreconcilable to the project
of white supremacy which the University is a legacy of. And radical,
critical, *decolonial* scholars of Ethnic Studies, Black Studies, Women
Studies, and beyond know tenure is not the beginning or end of the
fight. After all, as Gabrielle noted, we have been \"scholar exiles\"
for generations. 

What then is the scholar exile to do in the face of such a crossroads?
On the one hand, as people thinking with our communities and with the
world, we know we have a right to our knowledges, our ways of being (and
our arcane secrets). On the other hand, our demands appear to fail
against the Tower walls and seem futile, small, and impossible to
achieve. Are they misplaced? Are they naive? Should we, as I saw calls
to on social media, reject institutions like Harvard wholesale because
\"of course they did\" and \"you should know better\" and \"go teach
your people at X \[insert HBCU, HSI, Tribal, community college\]
instead\"? Do we, as Gabrielle said, retract our labor, boycott the
committees, reject letter requests? I don\'t have answers to these
questions. I wish I did. And maybe there aren\'t finite answers but
answers for a time, for a place, for a moment. In [*Their Eyes Were Watching God*](https://www.zoranealehurston.com/books/their-eyes-were-watching-god/),
Janie reflected, \"There are years that ask questions and years that
answer.\" And these last few years---Hurricane Katrina in 2005, the
earthquake in Haiti in 2010 with its island-wide ramifications, the U.S.
Presidential election of 2016, Hurricane Maria in 2017---have asked
questions of all of us, questions we have to struggle with or fail in
our duty to our planet and our species. 

Ethnic Studies rise! What a call to power! I feel deeply that this is
not a call to further institutionalize. It is not a call to entrench
ourselves within institutions. It is also not a futile call. It is not
one that means our work in these spaces---even when we are rejected,
even when we are killed by them---goes unrewarded. Our work goes on so
long as it is true to the people, for the people, with the people.
Ethnic Studies is an alternative edifice to the Ivory Tower, a radical
geography that, yes, will make the university unrecognizable to itself,
but will also create something new in its wake. And, in fact, Ethnic
Studies is useless *if that isn\'t what it is doing or has been doing
all along.*

This is why they fear us.

During \#LorgiaFest I tweeted that, \"We see us.\" We see us. Seeing
each other might just allow us enough breath in our lungs to imagine
otherwise when we feel like we are drowning. The glow of our loving
gazes on each other might just be the beacon that lone scholar of color
working at Mid-America All-White University needed to create something
anew, to dream something larger than what the University has asked of
them. Through our Second Sight, we may be able to provide this
undergraduate with much needed tools they can use to fight for their own
dreams, or offer that graduate student the perspective they need to
trust their own intuition, or we may be able to respond to this
community organizers' request for support with expertise, joy, and
solidarity.

Critical, radical, decolonial Ethnic Studies is beyond the University.
It is a call back, as Gabrielle and Dylan remind us, to the human, away
from the structures, and to the people. People inhabit these
death-dealing institutions, people maintain the standards of
confidentiality, people police the borders, people resist, people
organize sit-ins, people teach for a better world. People can be
galvanized, and people can be changed. 

Our demands aren\'t futile. We give you LIFE. One breath, one memory,
one ceremony, one archive at a time.
