---
layout: post
section-type: post
comments: false
title: "Ethnic Studies and the Liberal Hydra"
summary: ""
pid: rt7
permalink: /roundtable/liberal-hydra/
authors:
  - name: Nelson Maldonado-Torres
    img: maldonado-torres.jpg
    bio: "Nelson Maldonado-Torres is Professor in the Department of Latino and Caribbean Studies and the Comparative Literature Program at Rutgers University, New Brunswick, and a member of the Executive Board of the Frantz Fanon Foundation in France. He is particularly interested in the crossings of different genealogies of thinking, and their appearance in different genres of writing, discourses, artistic expressions, and social movements. He is the author of <em>Against War: Views from the Underside of Modernity</em> (Duke, 2008), co-editor of <em>Latin@s in the World-System: Decolonization Struggles in the 21<sup>st</sup> Century U.S. Empire</em> (Routledge, 2006), and some of his essays on decolonial theory have been collected in <em>La descolonización y el giro de(s)colonial</em> (Universidad de la Tierra, 2012). He is currently working on two book-length projects, <em>Fanonian Meditations</em> and <em>Theorizing the Decolonial Turn</em>."
  - name: Yomaira C. Figueroa-Vasquez
    img: yomaira-figueroa.jpg
    bio: "Yomaira C. Figueroa-Vásquez is Assistant Professor of Afro Diaspora Studies in the department of English and the African American &amp; African Studies program at Michigan State University. Her work is centered on 20th century U.S. Latinx, Caribbean, Afro-Latinx and Afro-Hispanic literature &amp; culture. Her current book project, <em>Decolonizing Diasporas: Radical Mappings of Afro-Atlantic Literature</em>, focuses on diasporic and exilic Puerto Rican, Cuban, Dominican, and Equatoguinean texts in contact. Her articles have appeared in <em>Hypatia</em>, <em>CENTRO Journal</em>, <em>Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education &amp; Society</em>, and <em>sx salon</em>. She is also the co-founder of the Women of Color Initiatives Project at Michigan State and co-organizer of the <a href='http://www.yomairafigueroa.com/electric-marronage'><em>Electric.Marronage</em></a> set of workshops, lectures, and labs."
---

In this final installment for the Ethnic Studies Rise roundtable, Nelson
Maldonado-Torres (Rutgers U and Fanon Foundation) and Yomaira
Figueroa-Vasquez (Michigan State University) situate Ethnic Studies in
longer histories of struggle for justice in and outside of the U.S.
academy, and against the white supremacy and Eurocentrism of the modern
university. They foreground the marginalization of Ethnic Studies
scholars and curricula in the university and highlight the potential of
ethnic studies scholars and women of color feminists to decolonize the
university.

---

<br>

### Nelson Maldonado-Torres | Writes:

Any decent history of the university in the United States, and, indeed,
in the Western world, will have to count Ethnic Studies as one of the
most original and influential contributions of the U.S. academy to the
array of fields and sciences that constitute the modern Western
university. Likewise, any decent history of the university in the United
States will have to count the academy’s response to the constructive
challenges posed by Ethnic Studies as one of the greatest failures of
the U.S. university.

There was a reason why students in the Third World Liberation Front
proposed the creation of Third World Colleges, instead of only
departments of Ethnic Studies, in the late 1960s. Something along the
lines of a Third World College could have been in a potentially better
position to face the coloniality of university education, including the
liberal arts and sciences, where Ethnic Studies have been for the most
part located. For, what the students found was that emancipation from
slavery, the Civil Rights struggle, and the various revolts against
settler colonialism and coloniality were incomplete without major
innovations in college education and research, among other areas. They
also believed that neither conservatism nor liberalism were
well-equipped or prepared to take the lead in the needed
transformations. They discovered that education remained largely an
education for whites and from the point of view of their white
ancestors. Thus, from this perspective, the arts and sciences could have
been better referred to as “white arts and sciences,” making the
creation of a new school needed alongside the effort to decolonize the
existing arts and sciences.

The struggles of indigenous peoples, African Americans, and other people
of color in the U.S. include facing the imposition of Western
schooling—for the purpose of eliminating indigenous languages and
knowledges, for instance—total exclusion from schooling, limitation of
schooling to practical and vocational education, and various forms of
segregation, including in education. The early cases against school
segregation in California such as *Alvarez vs. Owen* in 1931 and *Mendez
vs. Westminster* in 1946, as well as the landmark decision of the
Supreme Court in the 1954 case of *Brown vs. Board of Education* in
Kansas, opened up a door, the ramifications of which are still seen
today.

Looking back, it should not be a mystery that college campuses became
sites of students of color actions a decade or so after *Brown vs. Board
of Education* and after scenes such as [Dorothy
Counts](https://www.wfae.org/post/charlotte-talks-dorothy-counts-integrated-cms-1957-story-behind-her-historic-walk#stream/0)
entering Harding High in North Carolina in 1957. For, it was not only
bodies of color who were now entering the privileged spaces of white
education, but also their minds, memories, aspirations, questions, and
concerns. The stage was set for a confrontation between a system of
education founded on racial liberalism, and students that would get to
directly experience the contradictions and hypocrisies of liberalism and
of the up to now established liberal arts and modern Western research
and education framework.

Today, the demands of generations of students of color are arrested by
an impasse between racial conservatism, racial neoliberalism, and racial
liberalism. One is invested in [“making America white
again,”](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/11/21/making-america-white-again)
as the late Toni Morrison put it, another on reducing public goods,
particularly when and where the public becomes increasingly composed of
people of color, and the other on justifying ideas of excellence that
keep demands for changes at bay and protect what Gloria Wekker and
others refer to as [white
innocence](https://www.dukeupress.edu/white-innocence). The three
ideologies ([racial conservatism, racial neoliberalism, and racial
liberalism](https://scholarworks.umb.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1435&context=humanarchitecture))
are in tension as much as they also work together against three rallying
cries from minoritized sectors: desegregation, reparations, and
decolonization—of bodies, structures, symbols, and knowledge. These
cries come together in the idea and search for decoloniality, which, in
line with Ethnic Studies, is also an unfinished project that counters
racial conservatism, racial liberalism, and racial neoliberalism in the
academy and beyond. This gift of communities of color cannot but
represent a threat and a poison to the racial liberal academy, including
the arts and sciences.

It is therefore no mystery either that college campuses, which
conservatives consider excessively liberal, also seem to be
“excessively” racist, by which I mean that they have become some of the
most prominent spaces where one finds vulgar racism and affirmations of
white supremacy—e.g., most dramatically recently at [Syracuse
University](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QwMW5lEb-_M). Contrary to
the presumptions of the liberal establishment, and as generations of
students of color have suggested, if not made explicit, vulgar racism is
not some kind of unique and strange experience for them, but rather a
natural extension of their day to day life in dorms, libraries, and
classrooms. Faculty of color arguably have similar experiences in their
day to day activities and interactions in department meetings, exchanges
with Deans and senior administrators, and even in their own classrooms.
It adds insult to injury when the collective achievements of students
and faculty of color are then taken by universities to showcase their
alleged success, when some of these very students have to drop because
they can no longer pay for school, or when faculty are easily dismissed
or denied tenure after they make titanic efforts to maintain their
intellectual and ethical integrity in the highly racialized space of the
academy. However, what is an injury to them is taken as pure consistency
by academic leaders. The claim of consistency cannot be denied: the
consistency of liberalism, the liberal arts, and the predominant modern
Western approaches to knowledge production to contain and keep at bay
demands for desegregation, reparations, and decolonization of bodies,
structures, symbols, and epistemologies that emerge from the imperatives
and vision of Ethnic Studies and decoloniality.

While conservatives complain about liberals, and liberals oppose what
they see as narrow views of conservatives at universities, it is
arguably liberals who keep the door open for the most racist forms of
conservatism to return in force. They partly do this through actions
that go from rejection to containment and commodification of
intergenerational demands by students and faculty of color in their
universities. In the last presidential elections, Cornel West described
the difference between the two candidates for the presidency, Hillary
Clinton and Donald Trump, as one between a [“neoliberal disaster” and a
“neofascist catastrophe.”](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T0gdxq2JNng)
While political liberalism and academic liberalism are not exactly the
same, one cannot but wonder if the distinction between disaster and
catastrophe also applies to the dynamics between conservatives and
defenders of liberal education and knowledge production at university
campuses.

The blindness of the university as a whole is linked to its hubris and
arrogance. As the most recognized institution that fosters knowledge and
promotes civility in modern nation-states, the university is conceived
as both rooted in (liberal) traditions that must be preserved and also
as always ahead of its time. It is therefore anchored in a glorious past
that must be assumed, not questioned, and already presumed to exist in a
future to which everyone must catch up. In this context, the voice,
views, and demands of the racially disenfranchised are seen as doubly
undisciplined and erratic: they are viewed as if they have suffered the
past, more than made any significant history of their own, and
considered therefore to live in large ignorance and resentment. At the
same time, this view of their ignorance and resentment makes them
considered ill candidates to lead anyone to the future, as they are
traumatized and stuck in the past as a result. Instead, they have to be
led to the future that can only be achieved through disciplining into
the racial liberal order of being/power/knowledge. It is believed that
the university is the premier institution through which this mutation
can be achieved.

Ethnic Studies, when it has preserved its
emancipatory impetus, has always been and must continue to be something
beyond “ethnic studies.” I have proposed conceiving Ethnic Studies as a
form of decolonial transdisciplinarity—see the wonderful special issue
on the <a href="https://esr.ucpress.edu/content/42/2" target="_blank">50<sup>th</sup> anniversary of Ethnic Studies</a> in the *Ethnic Studies
Review* co-edited by Xamuel Bañales and Leece Lee-Oliver. The “trans”
indicates both the transgression and the transcendence of established
disciplines, while decoloniality points to commitments with the projects
of desegregation, reparations, and decolonization without which
knowledge production remains skewed and racism rampant in universities
and contemporary societies.

Ethnic Studies must lead the way to more comprehensive and demanding
meanings of excellence and to epistemic justice. In order to do this, we
cannot be satisfied with only asking for the creation and integration of
Ethnic Studies in the established humanities or social sciences. We
should consider other possibilities such as creating new and strongly
supported schools, hubs, centers, and institutes for decolonial and
transdisciplinary projects along the lines of what the Third World
Liberation Front conceived of as Third World Colleges and demonstrating
the strategic priority of Ethnic Studies by having strong undergraduate
and graduate degrees in multiple Ethnic Studies and intersectional
areas, among other efforts. The goal is not to keep a new College,
institutes, or a strengthened Ethnic Studies in isolation, but rather to
put them in the position to help infuse the entire arts and sciences and
the university with central questions in Ethnic Studies and related
areas like women of color feminisms and relevant artistic and social
movements. The strategies of prioritizing diversity initiatives in
traditional fields and putting Ethnic Studies in second place, or having
Ethnic Studies negotiate arrangements with other areas as a condition
for tenure lines or resources, are as misguided as they are inefficient.
They also often pretend to hide a more sustained strategy of containment
and perpetual epistemic minoritization.

The needed changes cannot be achieved by Ethnic Studies students and
scholars alone. It will also require leadership from Presidents,
Chancellors, Deans and other senior administrators. They will have to be
committed to creating a new ethos of innovation at their universities.
For this, they will have to be open for a critical engagement with the
established rankings, instead of guiding some of their most important
decisions on that basis. The reason is simple: the established rankings
of disciplines for the most part exclude Ethnic Studies areas, and, more
importantly, they tend to reflect established criteria for productivity
and excellence in scholarly work that fails to properly consider the
critical implications of the knowledge that is produced in and through
Ethnic Studies and related fields. The coloniality of the rankings often
combine with the coloniality of racial liberalism to maintain the status
quo. Neither the rankings nor a questionable desire to defend racial
liberalism in face of conservatism and neoliberalism should be used as
an excuse for failing to respond to intergenerational students and
faculty demands for a better education and more critical knowledges.

As I have pointed out
[elsewhere](https://fondation-frantzfanon.com/the-u-s-elections-ethnic-studies-and-the-university-a-view-from-the-historically-disenfranchised/),
university leaders and defenders of the liberal arts and sciences will
do well to realize that supporting the vision of Ethnic Studies might be
one of the best possible tools in the academy against the increasing
force and presence of neofascism in the U.S. and other parts of the
globe. It is time to seriously consider the idea that liberalism does
not provide an effective response against fascism, neofascism, or
apartheid; rather, it is entangled and maintains serious continuities
with it. Liberalism writ large creates impediments to post-genocidal and
decolonial projects and initiatives in the form of disruptions,
divisions, cooptations, and permanent delays. For this reason, while
liberals often feel moral superiority over fascists, sometimes it is not
clear whether fascism is a form of high intensity liberalism, or whether
liberalism is a low intensity expression of a fundamental fascism. How
else to explain the indifference to dispossession and murders, land
theft, constant displacement, colonialism, and the perpetual war over
bodies of color in the modern Western liberal order? And how to
interpret the persistence of the idea that colonization brought
civilization? Ethnic Studies emerged as part of a rallying cry against
this order. Therefore, it is not coincidence that it is often perceived
as a threat.

Liberalism and the liberal order of knowledge in the academy have to
change and become something else. They can start doing this by providing
serious support to a plurality of visions and projects that seek to
explore and to oppose the deep roots of fascism and coloniality in the
modern world. These visions and projects need to substantially engage,
if not directly emerge from, the intergenerational and intersectional
struggle of the dispossessed. This can be a form of starting to assume
responsibility for settler colonialism, for colonialism, and for a long
history of minoritization of multiple groups. It can also be a way to
responsibly respond to demographic changes in the U.S., among other
geopolitical spaces in the Global North, in the 21<sup>st</sup> century. All of
this points to a substantial engagement with the vision and mission of
Ethnic Studies in the academy. This vision and mission, grounded in
struggles for emancipation and decolonization in the U.S. and across the
Global South, including the south in the north, and oriented by the
desire for “building the world of *you*,” to cite Frantz Fanon, continue
to be offered as part of the solution. It is time to take Ethnic Studies' fields and projects with the seriousness that they deserve.

Along with efforts to eradicate neofascism and to challenge racial
neoliberalism, including the increased costs of education, this
rethinking of the university *with and through* Ethnic Studies—to
paraphrase [Johnella
Butler’s](https://books.google.com/books?id=UAaKq3r6UiYC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false)
view of Ethnic Studies in her splendid anthology about it, as well as to
evoke [Sylvia Wynter’s](https://www.jstor.org/stable/302808?seq=1)
view of the New Studies and the much needed overcoming of Western
modern/colonial humanism—could help make university campuses the
intellectual homes and engines of excellence in knowledge production and
creativity that they should be. Why not come together and join forces in
the support of the Ethnic Studies imperative and its vision of what
South African student activists have called a [“free and
decolonised”](https://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2016/10/feesmustfall-decolonising-education-161031093938509.html)
education for an-other university, an-other society, and an-other world?

<br>

### Yomaira C. Figueroa-Vasquez | Responds:

Responding to this post is thrice a labor of love. By taking on this
task I acknowledge the role of Ethnic Studies as a transformative
transdisciplinary and transnational project, I align myself with Lorgia
García Peña and those who stand beside her decrying the unjust and
egregious treatment she has received at Harvard University, and I
respond in kind to the words of my advisor and mentor, Nelson
Maldonado-Torres, who first introduced me to Ethnic Studies as a field
of research and liberatory practice as a graduate student.

**I.**

In his post, Maldonado-Torres traces the histories of the Western
Euro-centric neoliberal university, the fight for Ethnic Studies by
students in the 1960s, and the continual battle to bring the histories
and struggles of people to the fore of movements for justice and
self-determination. These students, and generations of students since,
recognized that it was not them, their families, their communities, or
their ancestors who lacked value, the capacity for humanity, and
generosity. Instead, it was the violence of Western society, born and
sustained through coloniality, that was the "decadent" and "dying
civilization" and therefore ill equipped to solve the problems of its
own creation, as Aimé Césaire so eloquently argued in "[Discourse on
Colonialism](https://libcom.org/files/zz_aime_cesaire_robin_d.g._kelley_discourse_on_colbook4me.org_.pdf)".
Maldonado-Torres points out that "Contrary to the presumptions of the
liberal establishment \[...\] vulgar racism is not some kind of unique
and strange experience." Instead, students of color experience such
racism as "a natural extension of their day to day life in dorms,
libraries, and classrooms." Faculty of color, by extension, "arguably
have similar experiences in their day to day activities and interactions
in department meetings, exchanges with Deans and senior administrators,
and even in their own classrooms." This keen observation does not even
account for those in our communities and families who do not and cannot
inhabit these spaces of privilege within the ivory tower.

What's more, many Black, Indigenous, Latinx and other scholars of color
who come to the university from non-elite socioeconomic sectors contend
with both the covert and overt racism of the institution and the
systemic and state-sponsored racism of society writ large. The
dissonance between the liberal elitism and conservative racism of the
university and the scholar who was never meant to survive in those
spaces (or any space), is precisely why Ethnic Studies is more than a
political demand or transdisciplinary area of study. Ethnic Studies is a
lifeline, an insurgent emancipatory project, a mode of survival in the
fullest sense, and a necessary practice that, should it be taken
seriously within the self-proclaimed hallowed halls of educational
institutions and their innumerable administrators and leaders, would
lead to a transformation of knowledge itself and enable liberatory
political and social projects to be undertaken in earnest with the
seriousness they deserve.

Sylvia Wynter, Maldonado-Torres, and others have long-argued that Ethnic
Studies is a heretical intellectual and political practice that
questions and decenters the foundational mythologies of the Western arts
and sciences and of Western man who has overrepresented himself as The
Human and as the sole model of modern progress and humanity (relegating
all others to a sublimated derivative status). As Maldonado-Torres'
essay shows, the heresy of questioning the mandates of the neoliberal
modern/colonial order has been met with much resistance and often
vitriol from both "liberal" and "conservative" institutional
stakeholders. Furthermore, as [Wynter](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9780470996645.ch9) has noted, Ethnic Studies has found itself placed philosophically, as
well as in policy and in practice as vestibular to the university. In
addition to many existing departments and programs being placed at the
edges of the university (and in cramped quarters), Ethnic Studies also
is treated as a peripheral endeavor or as an invasive pathogen that will
necessarily rot and die through a designed process of resource
starvation, hostility, and neglect. While Black, Indigenous, Latinx, and
other scholars of color are asked to join the ranks of the professoriate
at various institutions, often through the demands of students of color
protesting, they are subsequently asked to attend to a myriad of
problems, projects, and initiatives that leave them overworked and
undervalued. If and when these faculty burn out, leave these
institutions, or are denied tenure, the existing problems that were
never really systemically addressed in the neoliberal university are
then presented to a new slate of faculty to "solve." This is a deadly
and seemingly endless cycle, and we know of too many examples of
universities leading to the premature death and mental and physical
collapse of faculty of color in general and of women of color in
particular.

**II.**

As a first-generation working-poor Afro-Puerto Rican undergraduate
student at Rutgers University I gravitated toward English, Women's &
Gender Studies, and Puerto Rican and Hispanic Caribbean Studies because
in each of these units I found critical threads for understanding the
histories of my family and communities, as well as new ways of
understanding the world at large. In these classes I found myself able
to articulate and understand the experiences of injustice, racism,
histories of dispossession, and the theories, politics, and practices of
women of color feminists. The content of these courses resonated with me
because they enhanced what I knew so intimately, what I had experienced
first-hand. In English, while there was a strong emphasis on the
European and white American canon, I was able to find refuge in the many
African American literature courses offered. In Puerto Rican Studies I
was able to excavate more fully why I came to grow up in the tenements
and public housing projects of Hoboken, NJ to a "multi-racial" family,
the daughter of two immigrants from the colony of Puerto Rico. I was
able to trace how my siblings were tracked out of educational attainment
and what sociopolitical and economic structures made it possible for me
to be the resident translator for my parents at government, medical, and
financial institutions. In Women & Gender Studies I pieced together how
violence against women was both a key story in my own life and in the
lives of women on both sides of my family on the island and in diaspora.
I also learned how women of color have always been at the forefront
(albeit often invisiblized) of social and racial justice movements. As
an undergrad I had built myself an interdisciplinary constellation of
study that would lead me to my graduate program at UC Berkeley's
Comparative Ethnic Studies Department. It was there that I learned that
Ethnic Studies is about problems - the fundamental problems of
dispossession, enslavement, colonization, and coloniality. I learned
that the conditions of our lives are the remnants, evolution, and
perpetuation of systems of inequality and hierarchization of humanity
endemic to the colonial project. Most importantly, I learned that
identifying these problems and responding to them as well as imagining
other ways to understand ourselves in the world is the central project
of Ethnic Studies.

What I learned in those English, Women & Gender Studies, and Puerto
Rican Studies courses as an undergrad and later in Comparative Ethnic
Studies as a graduate student required that, in ways big and small, I
theorize and practice liberation in relational and ethical ways. This
revelation is something that I experience as a sort-of déjà-vu each
semester I teach Ethnic Studies courses in the English Department,
African American & African Studies Department, and Chicano/Latino
Studies Program at my institution. I not only recall my own "coming to
consciousness," but I see my students grapple with these ideas and come
to more firmly believe that attaining the tools to understand colonial
modernity is no trifling feat, but a vast and necessary endeavor for
individuals and whole communities.

Rather than related to Ethnic Studies, I contend that the concerns and
thought brought forth by Black, Indigenous, Latinx, and women of color
feminists are central to Ethnic Studies as a field and as a politics of
being. This because women of color have been the backbone of the various
movements for justice that propelled Ethnic Studies projects. Without
the heresy of women of color feminisms the praxis of liberation will be
decisively partial, the philosophies and the poetics flimsy, and the
violence that disappears and kills women of color will remain untouched.
Just as we laud, recuperate, and recover male political, artistic, and
philosophical figures that have been instrumental in developing
liberatory projects for those most affected by colonial modernity, we
must tend to the most vulnerable, to those who are often cast to the
periphery. This is fundamental to any Ethnic Studies project in its
fullest and most insurgent liberatory embodiment. We must recognize that
one of the fundamental mechanisms of colonialism---as [María
Lugones](https://nycstandswithstandingrock.files.wordpress.com/2016/10/lugones-2007.pdf), [Xhercis Méndez](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/28ab/5c693adc5f91818fddc09890db93112ced12.pdf),
and other decolonial feminists argue---was the imposition of gender
binaries, racialized gender hierarchies, and racialized gender-based
violence as modes of controlling bodies, territories, minds, and
spirits. Ethnic Studies is incomplete without the contributions of women
of color thinkers and artists, for they make meaning of survival and
make imagining different futures possible. They have made a politics out
of the practices of identifying interlocking struggles and forging
relations across difference in the fight for liberation.