---
layout: post
section-type: post
comments: false
title: "Ethnic Studies Rise: Afterword"
summary: ""
pid: rt8
permalink: /roundtable/afterword/
authors:
  - name: Katerina Gonzalez Seligmann
    img: katerina-gonzalez.jpg
    bio: "Katerina Gonzalez Seligmann is an assistant professor of Latin American, Caribbean, and U.S. Latinx literature at Emerson College who specializes in Caribbean and Caribbean diaspora literature, history, and social theory. She is currently completing a book about pan-Caribbean discourse in literary magazines produced in English, Spanish, and French. Her essays appear or are forthcoming in <em>South Atlantic Quarterly</em>, <em>MLN</em>, <em>Small Axe</em>, <em>The Global South</em>, and <em>Inti</em>. She co-edited with Clement White a Special Issue on Nicolás Guillén of the <em>C. L. R. James Journal</em> (2015), and she is the translator of <em>Spinning Mill</em> (Cardboard House Press, 2019), a collection of poems by acclaimed Cuban author Legna Rodríguez Iglesias.</em>."
  - name: Raj Chetty
    img: raj-chetty.jpg
    bio: "Raj Chetty is an assistant professor of Black Literature and Culture at San Diego State University who specializes in Caribbean literature with a focus on the black and African diaspora. He is finishing his first book, <em>“On Refusal and Recognition”: Disparate Blackness in Dominican Literary and Expressive Cultures</em>, and beginning work on a second book, <em>The Entry of the Chorus: Theatrical Legacies of C. L. R. James’s The Black Jacobins</em>. With Amaury Rodríguez he is co-editor of a special issue of <em>The Black Scholar</em> on “Dominican Black Studies,” and his essays appear in <em>Small Axe</em>, <em>Callaloo, Palimpsest: A Journal on Women, Gender, and the Black International, Afro-Hispanic Review, and Meridional: Revista Chilena de Estudios Latinoamericanos</em>."
  - name: Alex Gil
    img: alex-gil.jpg
    bio: "Alex Gil is the Digital Scholarship Librarian for Columbia University. He specializes in techno-social miracles in the humanities and the surrealist poetry of the Caribbean. Some say he is a hummingbird in human form, but those are legends."
---

<br>

When Harvard denied tenure to Lorgia García Peña we were struck by a
collective pathos. Not only did they deny tenure to a leading scholar
and intellectual of Ethnic Studies, Black Studies, Latinx Studies, Women
and Gender Studies, and Caribbean Studies, but that denial antagonized
the multidisciplinary framework of knowledge production that her work
offers. García Peña\'s case is not at all singular, but considering the
enormity of her work and how much we and so many others admire her as a
scholar, intellectual, and activist, that decision struck a chord that
reverberated broadly, as attested to by the thousands of signatures on
petitions and letters on her behalf. Student protests broke out at
Harvard almost immediately as well. The students demanded both an
investigation into their extraordinary professor's tenure case and a
long-overdue Ethnic Studies program at their school. These students
became our beacon.

Our response---\#Lorgiafest and the Ethnic Studies Rise roundtable---has
been an exercise of solidarity with García Peña, with every scholar in
Ethnic Studies and Critical Race Studies denied tenure, with every
scholar in Ethnic Studies and Critical Race Studies without stable
employment, with every scholar who quit the academy, with every graduate
student who has quit or is on the verge of quitting, with every
undergraduate who is aggrieved by the racism encoded in the U.S.
academy, with every person far from the walls of academia whose role as
a potential or actual producer of knowledge is refused by the
"bordering" agents of disciplinarity, to borrow from García Peña.

\#Lorgiafest and the roundtable have taken on a life of their own. From
the start, we wanted to organize a public action in solidarity with
García Peña and her protesting students---an intervention explicitly
conceived not to re-center the university that denied her tenure, but to
highlight instead the impact of her wide-ranging scholarship and public
writing. Once our plan to organize a collective reading exercise on
academic Twitter took shape---what became \#Lorgiafest---the roundtable
emerged as its guiding companion. The latter was to provide a space to
reflect on the impact of García Peña's work alongside the current state
of Ethnic Studies in the U.S. academy; a space for scholarly guidance in
a difficult moment; a space to foment solidarity, concrete action, and
avenues of thought.

This work began on December 4*,* and the first invitations to
participate in the roundtable went out on December 14*.* Less than two
months after laying out our initial plans, we are wrapping up Ethnic
Studies Rise. We organized what may be one of the largest book clubs in
academic Twitter\'s history and curated eight thoughtful and provocative
discussions featuring eighteen scholars who reflect on Ethnic Studies,
Black Studies, Latinx Studies, Indigenous Studies, Women & Gender
Studies, and, in many cases, on García Peña's work. The force and speed
of this turnout is a testament to what we can build and bridge in
solidarity with each other.

The result of this roundtable far exceeded our expectations. As the
roundtable entries developed, later pieces explicitly and implicitly
built upon earlier ones. Although we asked each participant to be in
conversation with 1-2 other scholars, the conversations productively
transgressed the borders between each discreetly organized entry. What
we witnessed as curators and editors was a centrifugal force extending
well beyond our initial intent. We know this centrifugal force is
extending even farther, as people are using Ethnic Studies Rise as a
teaching tool, as a resource to think with and through García Peña's
scholarship and the relationship between Ethnic Studies and the U.S.
academy today.

Far from investing in the transformative potential of Ethnic Studies,
most institutions of higher education, like corporations more broadly,
have tapped into a discourse of diversity, inclusion, and equity while
simultaneously undermining the scholarship---and the
scholars---challenging the long history of Eurocentrism, antiblack
racism, imperial capitalist extraction, patriarchy, settler colonialism,
hetero- and cis-normativity, classist elitism, and ableism that
structure the university to this day. The institutional rhetoric of
managing difference that stultifies institutional discussions is
refreshingly and necessarily absent from this roundtable. We did not
need to make this point an editorial or curatorial decree. Our
contributors simply speak a different language.

To our great delight, this roundtable exemplifies the multidisciplinary
practice of critique through which Ethnic Studies thrives in its dynamic
locations, both within and outside academia. The roundtable attests
further to the originality and impact of Lorgia García Peña's work and
offers multiple ways of imagining a different future inside and outside
of the university.

In its inception and at its end, this project ultimately is that very
call we borrowed from Harvard student protesters and extended in
solidarity: Ethnic Studies Rise!

